
A NARRATIVE OF SOME OF THE LORD'S DEALINGS WITH GEORGE MÃœLLER

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF

SECOND PART


PREFACE TO THE

FIRST EDITION OF THE SECOND PART.

THROUGH grace I am, in some measure, conscious of my many weaknesses
and deficiencies; but, with all this, I know that I am a member of
the body of Christ, and that, as such, I have a place of service in
the body. The realization of this has laid upon me the responsibility
of serving the church in the particular way for which the Lord has
fitted me, and this has led me to write this second little volume, if
by any means those of my fellow-saints, who have not yet learned the
importance and preciousness of dealing with God Himself under all
circumstances, may be helped in learning this lesson. Nor did I think
that the first part of this Narrative rendered the second part
needless, because that contains more especially the Lord's dealings
with me as an individual, whilst this gives, more particularly, an
account of the remarkable way in which the Lord has helped me in
reference to His work in my hands. For this second part carries on
the account of the Orphan-Houses, etc., which are under my care, and
contains the substance of the Reports previously published, so that
any one who wishes to have the account from the beginning up to the
end of last year, may be able to obtain it. This latter point alone
made it needful for me to think about publishing this second part, as
of the Reports for 1838 and 1839, which still almost daily are
inquired after, there are only a few copies left, though 2,500 of the
one and 3,000 of the other were published and of the Report for 1840
there are also only about 500, out of 4,000, remaining. The being
thus able to put the whole account of the work into the hands of an
inquiring individual, affords such a one a fairer opportunity of
seeing the working of those scriptural principles on which the
Institution is established. And, lastly, the Lord's continued
blessing upon the first part of the Narrative and the Reports, both
to believers and unbelievers, has induced me to publish this second
volume, which I now affectionately commend to the prayers of the
saints, requesting at the same time their prayers for myself.

GEORGE MULLER.

Bristol, June 14, 1841.



SECOND PART

In publishing the continuation of the Narrative of some of the Lord's
dealings with me, I have thought it well to give it in the same form
in which the larger portion of the former part is written. I
therefore proceed to give extracts from my journal making here and
there such remarks as occasion may seem to require. The first, part
of the Narrative was carried on to the beginning of July 1837, from
which period the Continuation commences.

July 18, 1837. Four trials came upon me this morning, without my
having previously had opportunity for secret prayer. I had been
prevented from rising early, on account of having to spend part of
the night in a sick chamber; but this circumstance shows, how
important it is to rise early, when we are able, in order that we may
be prepared, by communion with the Lord, to meet the trials of the
day.

Aug. 15. Today the first 500 copies of my Narrative arrived, and I
had, once more, some conflict of mind whether, after all, I had not
been mistaken in this matter. A sort of trembling came over me, and a
wish to be able to retrace the step. Judging, however, from the most
searching self-examination, through which I had caused my heart to
pass again and again, as to my motives, before I began writing, and
whilst I was writing; and judging, moreover, from the earnestness in
prayer with which I had sought to ascertain the mind of God in the
matter, and from the subsequent full assurance which I had had of its
being according to His will, that in this way I should serve the
Church;--I was almost immediately led to consider this uncomfortable
and trying feeling as a temptation, and I therefore went to the box,
opened it, brought out some copies, and soon after gave away one, so
that the step could not be retraced. [This was the last temptation or
struggle I have had of that kind; for, though, very many times since,
I have had abundant reason for praising the Lord that He put such an
honour upon me, in allowing me to speak well of His name in so public
a manner, I have never since, even for one minute, been allowed to
regret publishing the Narrative; and almost daily have I been more
and more confirmed in the conviction, that the giving such like
publications to the church, making known the Lord's dealings with me,
is one part of my service towards the saints.]

Aug. 17. Today two more children were received into the Infant
Orphan-House, which makes up our full number, 66 in the Girls' and
infant-Orphan-Houses.

Aug. 28. When brother Craik and I began to labour in Bristol, and
consequently some believers united with us in fellowship, assembling
together at Bethesda, we began meeting together on the basis of the
written Word only, without having any church rules whatever. From the
commencement it was understood, that, as the Lord should help us, we
would try everything by the word of God, and introduce and hold fast
that only which could be proved by Scripture. When we came to this
determination on Aug. 13, 1832, it was indeed in weakness, but it was
in uprightness of heart.--On account of this it was, that, as we
ourselves were not fully settled as to whether those only who had
been baptized after they had believed, or whether all who believed in
the Lord Jesus, irrespective of baptism, should be received into
fellowship nothing was determined about this point. We felt free to
break bread and be in communion with those who were not baptized, and
therefore could with a good conscience labour at Gideon, where the
greater part of the saints, at least at first, were unbaptized; but,
at the same time, we had a secret wish that none but believers who
were baptized might be united with us at Bethesda. Our reason for
this was, that we had witnessed in Devonshire much painful disunion,
resulting, as we thought, from baptized and unbaptized believers
being in fellowship. Without, then, making it a rule, that Bethesda
Church was to be one of close communion, we nevertheless took care
that those who applied for fellowship should be instructed about
baptism. For many months there occurred no difficulty, as none
applied for communion but such as had either been already baptized,
or wished to be, or who became convinced of the Scriptural character
of believers' baptism, after we had conversed with them; afterwards,
however, three sisters applied for fellowship, none of whom had been
baptized; nor were their views altered, after we had conversed with
them. As, nevertheless, brother Craik and I considered them true
believers, and we ourselves were not fully convinced what was the
mind of the Lord in such a case, we thought it right that these
sisters should be received; yet so that it might be unanimously, as
all our church acts then were done; but we knew by that time, that
there were several in fellowship with us, who could not
conscientiously receive unbaptized believers. We mentioned,
therefore, the names of these three sisters to the church, stating
that they did not see believers' baptism to be scriptural, and that,
if any brother saw, on that account, a reason why they should not be
received, he should let us know. The result was, that several
objected, and two or three meetings were held, at which we heard the
objections of the brethren, and sought for ourselves to obtain
acquaintance with the mind of God on the point. Whilst several days
thus passed away before the matter was decided, one of those three
sisters came and thanked us, that we had not received her, before
being baptized, for she now saw that it was only shame and the fear
of man which had kept her back, and that the Lord had now made her
willing to be baptized. By this circumstance those brethren, who
considered it scriptural that all ought to be baptized before being
received into fellowship, were confirmed in their views; and as to
brother Craik and me, it made us, at least, still more question,
whether, those brethren might not be right; and we felt therefore,
that in such a state of mind we could not oppose them. The one
sister, therefore, who wished to be baptized, was received into
fellowship, but the two others not. Our consciences were the less
affected by this, because all, though not baptized, might take the
Lord's supper with us, at Bethesda, though not be received into full
fellowship; and because at Gideon, where there were baptized and
unbaptized believers, they might even be received into full
fellowship; for we had not then clearly seen that there is no
scriptural distinction between being in fellowship with individuals
and breaking bread with them. Thus matters stood for many months,
i.e. believers were received to the breaking of bread even at
Bethesda, though not baptized, but they were not received to all the
privileges of fellowship.--In August of 1836 I had a conversation with
brother H. C. on the subject of receiving the unbaptized into
communion, a subject about which, for years, my mind had been more or
less exercised. This brother put the matter thus before me: either
unbaptized believers come under the class of persons who walk
disorderly, and, in that case, we ought to withdraw from them (2
Thess. iii. 6); or they do not walk disorderly. If a believer be
walking disorderly, we are not merely to withdraw from him at the
Lord's table, but our behaviour towards him ought to be decidedly
different from what it would be were he not walking disorderly, on
all occasions when we may have intercourse with him, or come in any
way into contact with him, Now this is evidently not the case in the
conduct of baptized believers towards their unbaptized fellow-believers.
The Spirit does not suffer it to be so, but He witnesses that
their not having been baptized does not necessarily imply
that they are walking disorderly; and hence there may be the
most precious communion between baptized and unbaptized believers.
The Spirit does not suffer us to refuse fellowship with them in
prayer, in reading and searching the Scriptures, in social and
intimate intercourse, and in the Lord's work; and yet this ought to
be the case, were they walking disorderly.--This passage, 2 Thess.
iii. 6, to which brother R. C. referred, was the means of showing me
the mind of the Lord on the subject, which is, that we ought to
receive all whom Christ has received (Rom. xv. 7), irrespective of
the measure of grace or knowledge which they have attained unto.--Some
time after this conversation, in May 1837, an opportunity occurred,
when we (for brother Craik had seen the same truth) were called upon
to put into practice the light which the Lord had been pleased to
give us. A sister, who neither had been baptized, nor considered
herself under any obligation to be baptized, applied for fellowship.
We conversed with her on this as on other subjects, and proposed her
for fellowship, though our conversation had not convinced her that
she ought to be baptized. This led the church again to the
consideration of the point. We gave our reasons, from Scripture, for
considering it right to receive this unbaptized sister to all the
privileges of the children of God; but a considerable number,
one-third perhaps, expressed conscientious difficulty in receiving
her. The example of the Apostles in baptizing the first believers
upon a profession of faith, was especially urged, which indeed would
be an insurmountable difficulty, had not the truth been mingled with
error for so long a time, so that it does not prove willful
disobedience, if any one in our day should refuse to be baptized
after believing. The Lord, however, gave us much help in pointing out
the truth to the brethren, so that the number of those, who
considered that only baptized believers should be in communion,
decreased almost daily. At last, only fourteen brethren and sisters
out of above 180, thought it right, this Aug. 28, 1837, to separate
from us, after we had had much intercourse with them. [I am glad to
be able to add, that, even of these 14, the greater part afterwards
saw their error, and came back again to us, and that the receiving of
all who love our Lord Jesus into full communion, irrespective of
baptism, has never been the source of disunion among us, though more
than forty-four years have passed away since.]

Sept. 2. I have been looking about for a house for the Orphan Boys,
these last three days. Every thing else has been provided. The Lord
has given suitable individuals to take care of the children, money,
&c. In His own time He will give a house also.

Sept. 6. This morning I accompanied a sister, who had been staying a
night with us, to the steamer. In answer to prayer I awoke at the
right time, the fly came at half-past five, her trunk was got from
the vessel in which she came yesterday, and we arrived before the
steamer had left. In all these four points I felt my dependence upon
the Lord, and He, having put prayer into my heart, answered it in
each of these four particulars.

Sept. 15. This evening we had a meeting for inquirers and applicants
for fellowship. There were more than we could see within three hours;
and when all strength was gone, we had to send away four. Among those
whom we saw was E. W., who had been kept for some time from applying
for fellowship, on account of not seeing believers' baptism to be
scriptural. She wished to be taught, but could not see it. She felt
grieved that on that account she could not attend to the breaking of
bread, which she did see to be scriptural. As soon as open communion
was brought about at Bethesda, she wished to offer herself for
fellowship, but was twice prevented by circumstances from doing so.
Last Wednesday evening she came to the baptizing, when once more,
after the lapse of more than two years, I preached on baptism, which
fully convinced her of its being scriptural, and she desires now to
be baptized. Her difficulty was, that she thought she had been
baptized with the Spirit, and therefore needed no water baptism,
which now, from Acts x. 44-47, she sees to be an unscriptural
objection.--Though it is only one month this day since my Narrative
was published, I have already heard of many instances in which the
Lord has been pleased to bless it.

This morning we received a parcel with clothes and some money for the
Orphans, from a sister at a distance. Among the donations in money
was a little legacy, amounting to 6s. 6 1/2d. from a dear boy, the
nephew of the sister who sent the things, who died in the faith. This
dear child had had given to him, in his last illness, some new
shillings, sixpences, and other smaller silver coins, amounting to
the above-mentioned little sum. Shortly before he fell asleep, he
requested that this his little treasure might be sent to the Orphans.
This precious little legacy is the first we have had.

Sept. 19. Two things were today particularly impressed upon my heart,
and may the Lord deepen the impression. 1. That I ought to seek for
more retirement, though the work should apparently suffer ever so
much. 2. That arrangements should be made, whereby I may be able to
visit the brethren more, as an unvisited church will sooner or later
become an unhealthy church. Pastors, as fellow-labourers, are greatly
needed among us.

Sept. 28, I have for a long time been too much outwardly engaged.
Yesterday morning I spent about three hours in the vestry of Gideon,
to be able to have more time for retirement. I meant to do the same
in the afternoon, but before I could leave the house I was called on,
and thus one person after the other came, till I had to go out. Thus
it has been again today.

Oct. 16. For a long time past brother Craik and I have felt the
importance of more pastoral visiting, and it has been one of our
greatest trials, that we have been unable to give more time to it.
This evening we had purposely a meeting of the two Churches, at which
brother Craik and I spoke on; I. The importance of pastoral visiting.
II. The particular obstacles which hindered us in attending to it.
III. The question whether there was any way of removing some of the
obstacles.

I. As to the importance of pastoral visiting, the following points
were mentioned: 1. Watching over the saints, by means of visiting
them, to prevent coldness, or to recover them from backsliding. 2. To
counsel and advise them in family affairs, in their business, and in
spiritual matters. 3. To keep up that loving familiar intercourse,
which is so desirable between the saints and those who have the
oversight of them.--These visits should be, if possible, frequent; but
in our case there have been several obstacles in the way.

II. The particular obstacles in our case are: 1. The largeness of the
number who are in communion with us. One hundred would be quite as
many as we have strength to visit regularly, and as often as would be
desirable; but there are nearly 400 in fellowship with us. 2. The
distance of the houses of the saints from our own dwellings, as many
live more than two miles of. 3. The Lord's blessing upon our labours.
Not one year has passed away, since we have been in Bristol, without
more than fifty having been added to our number, each of whom, in
general, needed several times to be conversed with before being
admitted into fellowship. 4. That brother Craik and I have each of us
the care of two churches. At the first sight it appears as if the
work is thus divided, but the double number of meetings, &c., nearly
double the work. 5. The mere ruling, and taking care, in general, of
a large body of believers, irrespective of the other work, takes much
more time, and requires much more strength, than the taking care of a
small body of believers, as we, by grace, desire not to allow known
sin among us. 6. The position which we have in the church at large
brings many brethren to us who travel through Bristol, who call on
us, or lodge with us, and to whom, according to the Lord's will, we
have to give some time. 7. In my own case an extensive needful
correspondence. 8. The weakness of body on the part of both of us.
When the preaching is done,--when the strangers who lodge with us are
gone,--when the calls at our house are over,--when the needful
letters, however briefly, are written,--when the necessary church
business is settled;--our minds are often so worn out, that we are
glad to be quiet. 9. But suppose we have bodily strength remaining
after the above things have been attended to, yet the frame of mind
is not always so, as that one could visit. After having been
particularly tried by church matters, which in so large a body does
not rarely occur, or being cast down in one's own soul, one may be
fit for the closet, but not for visiting the saints. 10. Lastly, in
my own case, no small part of my time is taken up by attending to the
affairs of the Orphan-Houses, Schools, the circulation of the
Scriptures, the aiding Missionary efforts, and other work connected
with the Scriptural Knowledge Institution.

III. What is to be done under these circumstances? 1. In the days of
the Apostles there would have been more brethren to take the
oversight of so large a body as we are. The Lord has not laid upon us
a burden which is too heavy for us; He is not a hard master. It is
evident that He does not mean us even to attempt to visit all the
saints as much as is absolutely needful, and much less as frequently
as it would be desirable. We mention this, to prevent uncomfortable
feelings on the part of the dear saints under our pastoral care, who
find themselves not as much visited as they used to be when we came
to Bristol, when the number of them was not 70, and now it is about
400, and when in many other respects the work in our hands was not
half so much, as it is now, and when we had much more bodily
strength. 2. it is therefore evident that there are other pastors
needed; not nominal pastors, but such as the Lord has called, to whom
He has given a pastor's heart, and pastoral gifts. 3. Such may be
raised up by the Lord from our own number, or the Lord may send them
from elsewhere. 4. But in the meantime we should at least see whether
there are not helpers among us. 5. As to the work itself, in order
that time may be saved, it appears desirable that the two churches,
Bethesda and Gideon, should be united into one, that the breaking of
bread should be alternately, and that the number of weekly meetings
should be reduced.

Oct. 21. A few weeks since I had rented a very large and a very cheap
house for the Boys' Orphan-House; but as the persons who lived in
that neighbourhood threatened the landlord with an action, on account
of letting his house for a charitable institution, I, at once, gave
up all claim. That which led me to do so, was the word of the Lord;
"As much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men." I was quite
sure when I gave up the agreement, that the Lord would provide other
premises. On the same morning when this took place, Oct. 5, the Lord,
to show His continued approbation of the work, sent 50l. by a sister,
who is far from being rich, for the furnishing of the Boys'
Orphan-House. Now, today, the Lord has given me another house for the
Orphan-Boys, in the same street, in which the other two Orphan-Houses
are. Thus, in His own time, He has sent help in this particular also.
Indeed in everything, in which I have had to deal with Him alone in
this work, I have never been disappointed.

Oct. 23. Today two young sisters were received into fellowship who
have been in our Sunday-School. Thus we begin now to reap fruit in
respect of our schools.

Nov. 1. Our Bible-School and Missionary funds having been for some
time very low, I had been led repeatedly to ask the Lord for a rich
supply, and mentioned several times, though with submission to His
will, the sum of 100l. before Him. However, He seemed not to regard
the prayer respecting the 100l., but gave to us by little and little
what was needed. Yesterday I received a donation of 80l., and today
one of 20l., and thus He has kindly given the 100l. By this means we
are able to increase our stock of Bibles, which has been much reduced
of late.

Nov. 5. Last night I awoke with a great weakness in my head, which
kept me a good while awake. I at last got to sleep by tying a
handkerchief round my head, and by thus pressing it. Today, however,
though weak, I was able to preach, and that with much enjoyment,
especially in the evening at Bethesda.

Nov. 6. I feel very weak in my head. This evening it was settled at a
meeting of the two churches, assembling at Bethesda and Gideon
Chapels, that, for the reasons before given, the two churches should
be henceforth united as one.

Nov. 7. My head is so weak, that I see it absolutely needful to give
up the work for some time. After I had come this morning to the
conclusion to leave Bristol for a while for the purpose of quietness,
I received an anonymous letter from Ireland with 5l. for my own
personal expenses, and thus the Lord has kindly supplied me with the
means for doing so.--I can work no longer, my head being in such a
weak stated from continual exertion, so that I feel now comfortable
in going, though scarcely any time could have been, humanly speaking,
more unsuitable. The Orphan-House for the Boys is on the point of
being opened, the labourers therefore are to be introduced into the
work;â€”-most important church matters have been entered upon and are
yet unsettled;â€”-but the Lord knows better, and cares for His work
more than I do or can. Therefore I desire to leave the matter with
Him, and He graciously helps me to do so, and thus, in the quiet
submission to His will, and the willingness to leave the work in His
own hands, I have the testimony that I have not been engaged in my
own work but in His.

Nov. 8. This morning I left Bristol. When I left my house, I knew not
what place to go to. All I knew was, that I must leave Bristol. A
Bath coach was the first one I could get, and I took it. My intention
was, not to go to brethren, as I needed perfect quietness; but I felt
so uncomfortable at the hotel, on account of the worldliness of the
place, that I went to see a brother, who with his aunts kindly
pressed me to stay with them.--This evening has been a very trying
season to me. My head has been very weak; I have greatly feared lest
I should become insane; but amidst it all, through grace, my soul is
quietly resting upon the Lord.

Nov. 12. Lordâ€™s day. I am still staying in Bath. The weakness of my
head allowed me to attend but one meeting, and even that distressed
my head much.

Nov. 13. I was greatly distressed this evening on account of my head.
I prayed earnestly to be kept from insanity.

Nov. 14. I am rather better in my head today.

Nov. 15. I left Bath, and went back to Bristol, as I felt I needed
more quietness than I can have in the house of any friends, being
continually drawn into conversation, which my head cannot bear.

Nov. 16. Today I went to Weston Super Mare, to take lodgings for
myself and family. A sister sent me this morning 5l., by which the
Lord has provided me with the means for removing my family.

Nov. 17. Weston Super Mare. This evening my wife and child, and our
servant arrived here. Yesterday a sister secretly put two sovereigns
in my wifeâ€™s pocket book. How kind is the Lord in thus providing us
with means according to our need! How kind also in having just now
sent brother T. to take the work arising from the Schools,
Orphan-Houses, &c., just as brother Câ€”r was sent two years ago,
shortly before I was completely laid aside!â€”-Today a brother sent me
information, that he had ordered one hundred pairs of blankets to be
sent to me, for distribution among the poor.

Nov. 23. My general health is pretty good; my head, however, is no
better, but rather worse. This evening I was led, through the
affliction in my head, to great irritability of temper. Of late I
have had afresh painfully to experience in myself two things: 1. that
affliction in itself does not lead nearer to God. 2. That we may have
a good deal of leisure time and yet fail in profitably improving it.
Often had I wished within the last months that I might have more
time. Now the Lord has given it to me, but alas! how little of it is
improved for prayer. I find it a difficult thing, whilst caring for
the body, not to neglect the soul. It seems to me much easier to go
on altogether regardless of the body, in the service of the Lord,
than to take care of the body, in the time of sickness, and not to
neglect the soul, especially in an affliction like my present one,
when the head allows but little reading or thinking.-â€”What a blessed
prospect to be delivered from this wretched evil nature! I can say
nothing respecting this day, and this evening in particular, but that
I am a wretched man.

Nov. 24. I am now quite sure that I want more than mere quiet and
change of air, even medical advice. My general health seems improved
through my stay at Weston, but the disease in my head is increased. I
have had many distressing moments since I have been at Weston, on
account of fearing that my disease may be the forerunner of insanity;
yet God has in mercy sustained me, and enabled me, in some small
measure, notwithstanding my great sinfulness, to realize the blessing
of being in Christ, and therefore secure for ever.

Nov. 25. We returned to Bristol. I was at peace, being able to cast
myself upon the Lord respecting the calamity which I feared. This
evening I saw a kind physician and surgeon, who told me that the
disease is either a tendency of blood to the head, or that the nerves
of the head are in a disordered state. They also told me that I had
not the least reason to fear insanity. How little grateful is my soul
for this!

Nov. 29. I am no better. A sister sent me today 5l. also a pickled
tongue, fowls, cakes, and beautiful grapes were sent to me. My cup,
as to temporal mercies, runs over.â€”-One of the Orphan children died
while I was at Weston Super Mare. There is reason to believe that she
died in the faith.

Nov. 30. I am not any better. I have written to my father, perhaps,
for the last time. All is well, all will be well, all cannot but be
well; because I am in Christ. How precious that now, in this my
sickness, I have not to seek after the Lord, but have already found
Him.

Dec. 1. By the mercy of God my head is somewhat relieved. My liver is
in a most inactive state, which, as my kind medical attendants tell
me, has created the pressure on the top of the head, and through the
inactivity of the liver, the whole system having been weakened, and
my mental exertions having been continued, the nerves of the head
have greatly suffered in consequence.-â€”This evening was sent to me,
anonymously, from a distance, 5l. for my own present necessities. The
letter was only signed F. W.â€”-A sister, a stranger, gave to my wife
1l. Thus the Lord remembers our increased expenditure in consequence
of my affliction, and sends to us accordingly.

Dec. 4. Yesterday I met with the brethren for the breaking of bread.
Today I am not so well. Every time that I meet with them, the nerves
of my head are excited, and I am worse afterwards. A sister from
Barnstaple sent us 1l. l5s.

Dec. 8. My head is not so well as at the end of last week. I find it
difficult to be in Bristol and not to exert my mind. Prayer and the
reading of the Word I can bear better than any thing. May the Lord
give me grace to pray more! I see as yet scarcely a single reason, so
far as I myself am concerned, why the Lord should remove this
affliction from me. I do not find myself more conformed to the mind
of Jesus by it.

Dec. 9. Two years ago this day, I stated my intention of establishing
an Orphan-House, if God should permit. What has God wrought since! 75
orphans are now under our care, and 21 more we can receive. Several
more are daily expected. During the last twelvemonth the expenses
have been about 740l., and the income about 840l. In addition to
this, about 400l. has been expended upon the Schools, the circulation
of the Scriptures, and in aiding Missionary purposes. More than
1100l. therefore we have needed during the past year, and our good
Lord has supplied all, without one single person having been asked
for any thing.

Dec. 12. Today the hundred pairs of blankets arrived. How kind of the
Lord to give us the privilege of being instrumental in providing, in
this respect, for some of the poor, both among the saints and in the
world! This donation came in most seasonably, as, on inquiring into
the circumstances of some of the poor, most affecting cases of
distress were discovered, on account of the want of blankets. May the
Lord give me grace to deny myself, in order to provide for the
necessities of the poor! How much may be done even by a little
self-denial! Lord, help me!-â€”The blankets were of a very good
quality. It is a Christlike spirit in supplying the necessities of
the poor, not to ask how little will do for them, but how richly may
I possibly supply their need.

Dec. 14. A sister, who a short time since had given me 5l. for my own
personal expenses, gave me another 5l. today. How very kind is the
Lord in providing so abundantly for us, and giving us far more than
we need!

Dec. 16. My head is not at all better, but rather worse. My medical
attendants have today changed the medicine. But however kind and
skillful they are, however nourishing the food which I take, however
much I seek to refrain from over-exertion, and however much I take
exercise in the air:â€”-till Thou, my great Physician, Thou, Creator of
the Universe, Lord Jesus, dost restore me, I shall be laid aside!â€”-I
have been working a little during the last fortnight, but only a
little.

Dec. 17.-â€”Lordâ€™s day. This morning I saw the 32 orphan girls, who are
above seven years old, pass under my window, to go to the chapel.
When I saw these dear children in their clean dresses, and their
comfortable warm cloaks; and when I saw them walking orderly under
the care of a sister to the chapel; I felt grateful to God that I had
been made the instrument of providing for them, seeing that they are
all better off, both as it regards temporal and spiritual things,
than if they were at the places from whence they were taken. I felt,
that, to bring about such a sight, was worth the labour not only of
many days, but of many months, or years. I felt that it answered all
the arguments of some of my friends who say "you do too much."

Dec. 24. This is the seventh Lordâ€™s day that I have been laid
aside.â€”-This day I determine, by the help of God, no more to send
letters in parcels, because I now clearly see that it is against the
laws of the country, and it becomes me, as a disciple of Jesus, in
every respect to submit myself to the Government, in so far as I am
not called upon to do any thing contrary to the word of God.

Dec. 26. Today the same brother who sent me the hundred pairs of
blankets, sent me 100l. to purchase as many more blankets as I can
satisfactorily distribute.

Dec. 29. Applications for the admission of orphans become more and
more numerous. Almost daily fresh cases are brought before us. There
are already as many applications for Orphan-Girls above seven years
as would fill another house. There are also many more Infant-Orphans
applied for than we can take in. Truly this is a large field of
labour!

Dec. 31. This is the eighth Lordâ€™s day since I have been kept from
ministering in the Word, nor did I think it well, on account of my
head, to go to any of the meetings today. Whether I am really getting
better I know not, yet I hope I am. My head is yet much affected,
though my liver seems somewhat more active.â€”-This morning I greatly
dishonoured the Lord by irritability, manifested towards my dear
wife, and that almost immediately after I had been on my knees before
God, praising Him for having given me such a wife.



REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1837.



I. There are now 81 children in the three Orphan-Houses, and nine
brethren and sisters who have the care of them. Ninety, therefore,
daily sit down to table. Lord look on the necessities of Thy servant!

II. The schools require as much help as before; nay, more,
particularly the Sunday School, in which there are at present about
320 children, and in the Day Schools about 350.â€”-Lord, Thy servant is
a poor man; but he has trusted in Thee, and made his boast in Thee,
before the sons of men; therefore let him not be confounded! Let it
not be said, all this is enthusiasm, and therefore it is come to
nought.

III. My temporal supplies have been:â€”-

1. By the Freewill Offerings through the boxes Â£149 18s. 6 1/2d.

2. By Presents in money, from believers in and out of Bristol Â£77 4s.
0d.

3. By Presents in clothes, provisions, &c., which were worth to us at
least Â£25 0s. 0d.

4. By Money through family connexion Â£45 0s. 0d.

5. We have been living half free of rent, whereby we have saved at
least Â£10 0s. 0d.

Altogether Â£307 2s. 6 1/2d.



I have purposely given here again, as at the close of the former
years, a statement of the supplies which the Lord has been pleased to
send me during this year, because I delight in showing, both to the
world and to the church, how kind a Master I have served even as to
temporal blessings, and how so plainly in my ease the Lord has
displayed the truth of that word "Whosoever believeth on Him shall
not be confounded," not merely by providing the means for His work in
my hands, but also by providing for the necessities of myself and
family.



January 1, 1838. Through the good hand of our God upon me, I have
been brought to the beginning of an other year. May He in mercy grant
that it may be spent more in His service than any previous year! May
I, through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, be more conformed to
the image of His Son, than has been the case hitherto!â€”-Last night
the brethren had a prayer meeting at Gideon, after the preaching was
over, and continued till half-past twelve in prayer; but I was unable
to be present.

Jan. 2. During the last night thieves broke into our house, and into
the school-room of Gideon Chapel. Being stopped by a second strong
door, in my house, or rather being prevented from going any further
by our loving Father, who did not allow the hedge which He has set
round about us, at this time, to be broken through, nothing was
missing, except some cold meat, which they took out of the
house.â€”-They broke open several boxes in Gideon school-room, but took
nothing. They left some of the bones, the meat being cut off, in one
of the boxes in Gideon school-room, and hung up another in a tree in
our garden. So depraved is man naturally when left to himself, that
he not only steals his fellowmanâ€™s property, but also makes sport of
the sin! How merciful that God has protected us! My mind was peaceful
when I heard the news this morning, thanking God from my heart for
preservation, and considering it as an answer to prayer, which had
been many times put up to Him, during these last years, respecting
thieves.

Jan. 6. I feel very little better in my head, though my general
health seems improved; but my kind physician says I am much better,
and advises me now change of air. I am most reluctant to go, though
on two former occasions when I used change of air, in August 1829 at
Exmouth, and in 1835 at Niton in the Isle of Wight, the Lord
abundantly blessed me in doing so, both bodily and spiritually. This
evening a sister who resides about fifty miles from hence, and who is
therefore quite unacquainted with the medical advice given to me this
morning, sent me 15l. for the express purpose of change of air, and
wrote that she felt assured, from having been similarly afflicted,
that nothing would do me so much good, humanly speaking, as quiet and
change of air. How wonderfully does God work! I have thus the means
of carrying into effect my physicianâ€™s advice.-â€”Today I heard of a
most remarkable case of conversion through the instrumentality of my
Narrative.

Jan. 7. This is the ninth Lordâ€™s day that I have been kept from
ministering in the Word. My head is in a distressing state, and, as
far as I can judge, as bad as ever. It seems to me more and more
clear that the nerves are affected. My affliction is connected with a
great tendency to irritability of temper; yea, with some satanic
feeling, foreign to me even naturally. O Lord, mercifully keep Thy
servant from openly dishonouring Thy name! Rather take me soon home
to Thyself!

Jan. 10. Today I went with my family to Trowbridge.

Jan. 12. Trowbridge. This evening I commenced reading Whitfieldâ€™s
life, written by Mr. Philip.

Jan. 13. I have already received blessings through Whitfieldâ€™s life.
His great success in preaching the Gospel is evidently to be
ascribed, instrumentally, to his great prayerfulness, and his reading
the Bible on his knees. I have known the importance of this for
years; I have practiced it a little, but far too little. I have had
more communion with God today than I have had, at least generally,
for some time past.

Jan. 14. Lordâ€™s day. I have, continued reading Whitfieldâ€™s life. God
has again blessed it to my soul. I have spent several hours in prayer
today, and read on my knees, and prayed for two hours over Psalm
lxiii. God has blessed my soul much today. I have been fighting
together with the armies of Jesus, though this is the tenth Lordâ€™s
day since I have been kept from preaching, and though I have not
assembled with the brethren here, on account of my head. My soul is
now brought into that state, that I delight myself in the will of
God, as it regards my health. Yea, I can now say, from my heart, I
would not have this disease removed till God, through it, has
bestowed the blessing for which it was sent. He has drawn out my soul
much yesterday and today. Lord, continue Thy goodness, and fill me
with love! I long, more fully to glorify God; not so much by outward
activity, as by inward conformity to the image of Jesus. What hinders
God, to make of one, so vile as I am, another Whitfield? Surely, God
could bestow as much grace upon me, as He did upon him. O, my Lord,
draw me closer and closer to Thyself, that I may run after Thee!-â€”I
desire, if God should restore me again for the ministry of the Word
(and this I believe He will do soon, judging from the state in which
He has now brought my soul, though I have been worse in health the
last eight days, than for several weeks previously), that my
preaching may be more than ever the result of earnest prayer and much
meditation, and that I may so walk with God, that "out of my belly
may flow rivers of living water." But alas! if the grace of God
prevent not, one day more, and the rich blessings, which He has
bestowed upon my soul yesterday and today, will all vanish; but
again, if He favours me (and oh! may He do it), I shall go from
strength to strength, and I and the saints in Bristol shall have
abundant reason to praise God for this my illness.

Jan. 15. I have had since yesterday afternoon less suffering in my
head than for the last eight days! though it is even now far from
being well. I have still an inward assurance, on account of the
spiritual blessings which the Lord has granted to me, that through
this affliction He is only purifying me for His blessed service, and
that I shall be soon restored to the work.â€”-Today, also, God has
continued to me fervency of spirit, which I have now enjoyed for
three days following. He has today, also, drawn out my soul into much
real communion with Himself, and into holy desires to be more
conformed to His dear Son. When God gives a spirit of prayer, how
easy then to pray! Nevertheless it was given to me in the use of the
means, as I fell on my knees last Saturday, to read His Word with
meditation, and to turn it into prayer. Today I spent about three
hours in prayer over Ps. lxiv. and lxv. In reference to that precious
word! "O thou that hearest prayer," (Ps. lxv. 2.) I asked the Lord
the following petitions, and entreated Him to record them in heaven
and to answer them.

1. That He would give me grace to glorify Him by a submissive and
patient spirit under my affliction.

2. That, as I was enabled now, and only now from my heart, to praise
God for this affliction, He would not remove His hand from me, until
He had qualified me for His work more than I have been hitherto.

3. That He would be pleased to grant, that the work of conversion,
through the instrumentality of brother Craik and myself, might not
cease, but go on as much now as when we first came to Bristol, yea,
more abundantly than even then.

4. That He would be pleased to give more real spiritual prosperity to
the church under our care, than ever we have as yet enjoyed.

5. Having praised Him for the sale of so many copies of my Narrative
in so short a time, I entreated Him to cause every copy to be
disposed of.

6. I asked Him to continue to let His rich blessing rest upon this
little work, and more abundantly, so that many may be converted
through it, and many of the children of God truly benefited by it;
and that thus I might now be speaking through it, though laid aside
from active service.

7. I asked Him for His blessing, in the way of conversion, to rest
upon the Orphans, and upon the Sunday and Day-School children under
our care.

8. I asked Him for means to carry on these Institutions, and to
enlarge them.

These are some of the petitions which I have asked of my God this
evening in connexion with this His own word. I believe He has heard
me. I believe He will make it manifest, in His own good time, that He
has heard me; and I have recorded these my petitions this 14th day of
January, 1838, that, when God has answered them, He may get, through
this, glory to His name.-â€”[Whilst writing this second part, I add to
the praise of the Lord, and for the encouragement of the children of
God, that petitions 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, have been fully answered, and
the other petitions, likewise, in part.]

Jan. 16, Tuesday. A blessed day. How very good is the Lord! Fervency
of spirit, through His grace, is continued to me, though this
morning, but for the help of God, I should have lost it again. The
weather has been very cold for several days; but today I suffered
much, either because it was colder than before, or because I felt it
more, owing to the weakness of my body, and having taken so much
medicine. I arose from my knees, and stirred the fire; but I still
remained very cold. I was a little irritated by this. I moved to
another part of the room, but felt the cold still more. At last,
having prayed for some time, I was obliged to rise up, and take a
walk to promote circulation. I now entreated the Lord on my walk,
that this circumstance might not be permitted to rob me of the
precious communion which I have had with Him the last three days; for
this was the object at which Satan aimed. I confessed also my sin of
irritability on account of the cold, and sought to have my conscience
cleansed through the blood of Jesus. He had mercy upon me, my peace
was restored; and when I returned I sought the Lord again in prayer,
and had uninterrupted communion with Him. [I have purposely mentioned
the above circumstance, in detail, in order to show, how the most
trivial causes may operate in suddenly robbing one of the enjoyment
of most blessed communion with God.] I have been enabled to pray for
several hours this day. The subject of my meditation has been Psalm
lxvi.--Verses 10, 11, and 12, are particularly applicable to my
present circumstances. God has already, through the instrumentality
of this my affliction, brought me into a "wealthy place," and I
believe He will bless my soul yet more and more.â€”-I do not remember
any time, when I have had more fervency of spirit in connexion with
such a desire to overcome every thing that is hateful in the sight of
God, and with such an earnestness to be fully conformed to the image
of Jesus. Truly, I have reason to apply to myself verse 16, and "tell
what God has done for my soul."--Verse 18 also I can take to myself.
I do not regard iniquity in my heart, but it is upright before Him,
through His grace, and therefore God does hear my prayers.--What has
God done for me, in comparing this 16th of January 1838 with the 16th
of January 1820, the day on which my dear mother died.--I have also
resolved this day, if the Lord should restore me again, to have an
especial meeting at the chapel once a week, or once a fortnight, with
the Orphan and Day-School children, for the purpose of reading the
Scriptures with them.â€”-My heart has been drawn out in prayer for many
things, especially that the Lord would create in me a holy
earnestness to win souls, and a greater compassion for ruined
sinners. For this I have been quickened through reading onward in
Whitfieldâ€™s life.

Jan. 17. The Lord is yet merciful to me. I enjoy fervency of spirit.
My soul has been again repeatedly led out in prayer this day, and
that for a considerable time.--I have read on my knees, with prayer
and meditation, Psalm lxviii.â€”Verse 5 "A Father of the fatherless,"
one of the titles of Jehovah, has been an especial blessing to me,
with reference to the Orphans. The truth, which is contained in this,
I never realized so much as today. By the help of God, this shall be
my argument before Him, respecting the Orphans, in the hour of need.
He is their Father, and therefore has pledged Himself, as it were, to
provide for them, and to care for them; and I have only to remind Him
of the need of these poor children, in order to have it supplied. My
soul is still more enlarged respecting Orphans. This word "a Father
of the fatherless," contains enough encouragement to cast thousands
of Orphans, with all their need, upon the loving heart of God.--My
head has been again in a distressing state today; my soul, however,
is in peace. May God in mercy continue to me fervency of spirit!

January 18 to February 2. During this time I continued still at
Trowbridge. I was, on the whole, very happy, and habitually at peace,
and had repeatedly much communion with God; but still I had not the
same earnestness in prayer, nor did I, in other respects, enjoy the
same degree of fervency of spirit, with which the Lord had favoured
me for several days previous to this period.While the considerable
degree of fervency of spirit, which I had had, was altogether the
gift of God, still I have to ascribe to myself the loss of it. It is
remarkable, that the same book, Whitfieldâ€™s Life, which was
instrumental in stirring me up to seek after such a frame of heart,
was also instrumental in depriving me of it, in some measure,
afterwards. I once or twice read that book when I ought to have read
the Bible on my knees, and thus was robbed of a blessing.
Nevertheless, on the whole, even this period was a good season.--My
health being not at all improved, it seemed best that I should give
up all medicine for a while, and take a tour; on which account I left
Trowbridge today and went to Bath, with the object of going from
thence to Oxford. I had grace today to confess the Lord Jesus on my
way from Trowbridge to Bath, as also twice, lately, in going from
Trowbridge to Bristol; but I was also twice silent. Oh that my heart
may be filled with the love of Jesus, in order that it maybe filled
with love for perishing sinners!

Feb. 3. I left Bath this morning, and arrived in the evening at
Oxford, where I was very kindly received by brother and sister ----,
and the sisters ----.

Feb. 7. Oxford. I had been praying repeatedly yesterday and the day
before, that the Lord would be pleased to guide me, whether I should
leave this place or not; but could not see it clearly to be His will
that I should do so, and therefore determined to stay. Now, as I am
able to have a quiet horse, I shall try horse exercise, if it may
please the Lord to bless that to the benefit of my health.

Feb. 10. I have had horse exercise for the last three days, but the
horse is now ill. "Mine hour is not yet come," is the Lordâ€™s voice to
me in this little circumstance.

Feb. 11. This morning I was directed to read Proverbs iii. 5-12,
having just a few minutes to fill up before breakfast. I was
particularly struck with those words: "Neither be weary of His
correction." I have not been allowed to despise the chastening of the
Lord, but I begin, now and then, to feel somewhat weary of His
correction. O Lord, have mercy upon Thy poor unworthy servant! Thou
knowest, that, after the inner man, I desire patiently to bear this
affliction, and not to have it removed till it has done its work in
me, and yielded the peaceable fruits of righteousness. But Thou
knowest also what a trial it is to me to continue the life I am now
living. Help, Lord, according to my need!

On Feb. 8th I sent a letter to the church in Bristol, which, having
been preserved, I give here in print, as it shows the way in which
the Lord dealt with me during and through the instrumentality of the
affliction, and which, with His blessing, may lead one or other of
the children of God who are in trial, quietly to wait for the end,
and to look out for blessings to be bestowed upon them through the
instrumentality of the trial.



To the Saints, united together in Fellowship, and assembling at
Bethesda and Gideon Chapels, Bristol.



Trowbridge, Feb. 1, 1838.

Dear Brethren,

Twelve weeks have passed away, since I last ministered among you. I
should have written to you repeatedly, during that period, had I not
thought it better to put aside every mental occupation which could be
deferred, as my head is unfit for mental exertion; but I would now
rather write a few lines, than appear unmindful of you. You are dear
to me; yea, so dear, that I desire to live and die with you, if our
Lord permit; and why should I not tell you so by letter? I will
write, then, as a token of brotherly remembrance and of love towards
you; and may it be a means of quickening you to prayer on my behalf.

In looking back upon my past life, I know not where to begin, and
where to end, in making mention of the Lordâ€™s mercies. His
long-suffering towards me in the days of my unregeneracy cannot be
described. You know a little of my sinful life, before I was brought
to the Lord; still you know but very little. If, however, I have much
reason to praise God for His mercies towards me in those days, I have
more abundant reason to admire His gentleness, long-suffering, and
faithfulness towards me since I have known Him. He has step by step
led me on, and He has not broken the bruised reed. His gentleness
towards me has been great indeed, very great. (Brethren, let us
follow God, in dealing gently with each other!) He has borne with my
coldness, half-heartedness, and backsliding. In the midst of it all,
He has treated me as His child. How can I sufficiently praise Him for
this long-suffering? (Brethren, let us imitate our Father, let us
bear long, and suffer long with each other!) He has been always the
same gracious, kind, loving Father, Friend, Supporter, Teacher,
Comforter, and all in all to me, as He was at the beginning. No
variableness has been found in Him towards me, though I have again
and again provoked Him. I say this to my shame. (Brethren, let us
seek to be faithful, in the Lord, towards each other! Let us seek to
love each other in the truth, and for the truthâ€™s sake, without
variableness! It is easy, comparatively, to begin to love; but it
requires much watchfulness, not to grow weary in love, when little or
no love is returned; yea, when we are unkindly treated, instead of
being loved. But as our gracious, faithful God, notwithstanding all
our variableness, loves us without change, so should we, His
children, love each other. Lord, help us so to do!)

Besides this gentleness, long-suffering, and faithfulness, which the
Lord has manifested towards me, and which I have experienced in
common with you all, the Lord has bestowed upon me peculiar blessings
and privileges. One of the chief is, that He has condescended to call
me for the ministry of His word. How can I praise Him sufficiently
for this! One who was such a sinner, such a servant of Satan, so fit
for hell, so deserving of everlasting destruction, was not merely
cleansed from sin and made a child of God through faith in the Lord
Jesus, and thus fitted for heaven, and did not merely receive the
sure promise that he should have eternal glory; but was also called
unto, and, in a measure, qualified for the expounding of the word of
God. I magnify Him for this honour!â€”-But more than this. More than
eleven years, with very little interruption, have I been allowed,
more or less, to preach the Word. My soul does magnify the Lord for
this! More still. The Lord has condescended to use me as an
instrument in converting many sinners, and, in a measure at least, in
benefiting many of His children. For this honour I do now praise God,
and shall praise Him not merely as long as I live, but as long as I
have a being. But I do not stop here. I have many other reasons to
speak well of the Lord, but I would only mention one. It is my
present affliction. Yes, my present affliction is among the many
things, for which I have very much reason to praise God; and I do
praise Him for it. Before you, before the whole church of Christ, and
before the world would I confess that God has dealt in very kindness
towards me in this affliction. I own, I have not borne it without
impatience and fretfulness; I own, I have been several times overcome
by irritability of temper on account of it; but nevertheless, after
the inner man, I praise God for the affliction, and I do desire from
my heart, that it may truly benefit me, and that it may not be
removed till the end has been answered, for which it has been sent.
God has blessed me in this trial, and is still blessing me.--As I know
you love me, (unworthy as I am of it), and feel interested about me,
I mention a few of the many mercies with which God has favoured me
during these twelve weeks. 1. At the commencement of my illness, when
my head was affected in a manner quite new to me, and when thus it
continued day after day, I feared lest I should lose my reason.--This
created more real internal suffering than ever I had known before.
But our gracious Lord supported me. His precious gospel was full of
comfort to me. All, all will be well, was invariably the conclusion,
the conclusion grounded upon Scripture, to which I came; yea, all
will be well with me eternally, though the heaviest of all earthly
trials should coins upon me, even that of dying in a state of
insanity.--I was once near death, as I then thought, nearly nine years
ago: I was full of comfort at that time; but to be comfortable,--to
be able quietly to repose upon God, with the prospect of an
affliction before one, such as I have now mentioned,--is more than to
be comfortable in the prospect of death, at least for a
believer.--Now, is it not well to be afflicted, in order to obtain
such an experience? And have I not reason, therefore, to thank God
for this affliction?



Oxford, Feb. 6, 1838.

When I began to write the foregoing lines, beloved brethren, I
intended to write but very briefly; but as I love you, and as I have
abundant reason to magnify the Lord, my pen ran on, till my head
would follow no longer.--I go on now to mention some other mercies
which the Lord has bestowed upon me, through my present affliction.

2. Through being deprived for so long a time of the privilege of
preaching the Word to sinners and saints, the Lord has been pleased
to create in me a longing for this blessed work, and to give me at
the same time to feel the importance of it, in a degree in which I
never had experienced it before. Thus the Lord has fitted me somewhat
more for His work, by laying me aside from it. Good therefore is the
Lord, and kind indeed, in disabling me from preaching. Great has been
my trial, after the self-willed old nature, not to be able to preach;
and long ere this, unfit as I was for it, I should have resumed the
work, had I followed my own will; but hitherto have I considered it
most for the glory of God, quietly to refrain from outward service,
in order to glorify Him by patient submission, till my Lord shall be
pleased to condescend to call His servant forth again for active
engagements. And then, I know, He will give me grace, cheerfully to
go back to the delightful service of pointing sinners to the Lamb of
God, and of feeding the church.

3. Through this affliction I have known experimentally in a higher
degree than I knew it before, how, if obliged to refrain from active
service, one can nevertheless as really and truly help the armies of
Jesus, through secret prayer, as if one were actively engaged in the
proclamation of the truth.--This point brings to my mind a truth, of
which we all need to be reminded frequently, even this, that at all
times, and under all circumstances, we may really and truly serve the
Lord, and fight for His kingdom, by seeking to manifest His mind, and
by giving ourselves to prayer.

4. Through the instrumentality of this affliction the Lord has been
pleased to show me, how I may lay out myself more fully for His
service in the proclamation of His truth; and, by His grace, if ever
restored for active service, I purpose to practice what He has shown
me.

5. Through being deprived so much from meeting with the brethren as I
have been these thirteen weeks, I have learned somewhat more to value
this privilege than I did before. For as my head has been much
affected, even through one meeting on the Lordâ€™s day, I have seen how
highly I ought to have prized the days, when twice or thrice I could
meet with the saints, without suffering from it.--Bear with me,
brethren, when I beseech you, highly to esteem the opportunities of
assembling yourselves together. Precede them with prayer; for only in
as much as you do so, have you a right to expect a blessing from
them. Seek to treasure up, not merely in your memory, but in your
heart, the truths which you hear; for soon you may be deprived of
these privileges, and soon you may be called upon to practice what
you hear. Brethren, let us not learn the greatness of our privileges,
by being deprived of them.--

I also delight in mentioning some of the particulars in which the
Lordâ€™s kindness to me has appeared in this affliction, and whereby He
has shown, that He does not lay more on us, than is absolutely
needful.

1. You know, that since May, 1836, I was able to walk but little.
This infirmity the Lord entirely removed, just before I became
afflicted in my head. This was exceedingly kind; for air and exercise
are the only means, which almost immediately relieve my head. How
much greater would have been the affliction, had I not been able to
walk about in the air!-â€”Truly, "He stayeth His rough wind, in the day
of His east wind." I delight in pointing out the gentleness of the
stroke.

Oxford, Feb. 7, 1838.

2. The Lord might have chosen to confine me to my bed, and kept me
there in much pain these thirteen weeks, for the sake of teaching me
the lessons which He purposes me to learn through this affliction;
instead of this, the pain in my head has been so slight, that it
would not be worth mentioning, were it not connected with a weakness
of the mental faculties, which allows of but little exertion.

3. Further, it might have pleased the Lord to incapacitate me
altogether for active service, but instead of this, He has still
allowed me, in some small measure, to help by my judgment in some
church matters, to write some letters in His service, to speak now
and then a word to believers for the furtherance of their faith, and
to confess His name repeatedly before unconverted persons, with whom
I have met on my journeys. Besides all this, I have had strength for
other work connected with the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

4. In one other point the Lord has been especially gracious to me, in
that, while I have been unable to preach, unable to write or read
much, or even to converse for any length of time with the brethren,
He has allowed me always sufficient strength for as much secret
prayer as I desired. Even praying with others has been often trying
to my head; but prayer in secret has not only never tried my head,
but has been habitually (I mean the act of prayer) a relief to my
head. Oh! how can I sufficiently praise God for this. How
comparatively slight are any trials to a child of God, as long as
under them he is enabled to converse freely with his Father! And so
sweet has been this communion with my Father, a few times, and so
have I been enabled to pour out my heart before Him, that whilst
those favoured seasons have lasted, I not only felt the affliction to
be no affliction, and could call it, from my heart, sweet affliction;
but I was almost unwilling soon to go back to the multiplicity of
engagements in Bristol, lest I should not have leisure to continue so
much in prayer, meditation, and the study of His word. Shall I not
then praise my Father for such dealings with me? Do I not even now
see this affliction working for my good? I say, therefore, after the
inward man: Father, continue Thy hand upon me, as long as it shall
seem good in Thy sight, only bless my soul!-â€”But, brethren, do not
mistake me, as if I meant that I prayed habitually with much
earnestness. O no! I pray a little habitually, I pray now and then
much; but I pray by no means as much as my strength and present time
allow me. Therefore ask God on my behalf, that grace may be given me,
habitually to pray much; and you will surely be profited by it.--But I
could not help alluding to this point, as the Lordâ€™s kindness is so
particularly seen in this matter.

5. Lastly, I cannot omit mentioning the kindness of the Lord, in
opening the houses of some of His children at Bath, Trowbridge, and
Oxford for me, during this my affliction. These dear saints have
shown me much kindness. But while I would be grateful to them for it,
I discern the hand of God in influencing their hearts. Moreover, I
have had kind medical attendants. And you, my dear brethren, though I
have been unable to minister among you, have continued to supply my
temporal wants, for which I thank you, and in all of which I see the
gracious, loving hand of my Father, who through all this, as by a
voice from heaven, tells me: "My child, even bodily health and
strength would I give, were it good for thee." I therefore desire to
wait for the good pleasure of my God concerning this point.

Your love will naturally ask, how I now am in body. My disease, as my
kind medical friends tell me, is an inactive liver, which causes the
pain in the head, and the inability of exerting my mind for any
length of time. In addition to this, the nerves of the head seem to
have suffered through over-exertion. As medicine had been tried for
about ten weeks, and had not given relief, it appeared well, that I
should give it up for a time, and simply travel about for the benefit
of the air. My own experience teaches me, that this means is
beneficial; for it gives almost immediate relief. In consequence of
this, I left Trowbridge last Friday, and arrived on Saturday evening
at Oxford, where I am staying with dear brother and sister B. I have
here all that brotherly love can do for me, and am in every way
comfortable. It is now a week since I have given up medicine, and I
am at least not worse, if not better; but I think I am a little
better. I wait on the Lord to show me His will, as to the place to
which I should go next.

As to my inner man, I am in peace, generally in peace, and long for
more conformity to the mind of Christ. My chief desire is, that if it
shall ever please the Lord to restore me again, to be sent back to
active service with increased humility, greater earnestness in the
work, greater love for perishing sinners, and a heart habitually
influenced by the truths which I preach.--Whether I shall ever be
restored for the work, I cannot say with certainty; but, if I may
judge from the Lordâ€™s dealings with me in former times, I have reason
to believe, that I shall yet be allowed to labour again.

In conclusion, dear brethren, pray for my dear brother and
fellow-labourer. Esteem him highly in the Lord; for He is worthy of
all honour.â€”-I would write more, for I have much more to speak of; but
as I purpose, if God allows me the pleasure, to write again soon, I
leave it till then. Farewell.

Your affectionate brother and servant in the Lord,

GEORGE MULLER.



Feb. 13. These ten days I have been staying in Oxford, though I came
only for one or two; but I have stayed to see the Lordâ€™s hand leading
me away from hence. I have now been led to decide on going to
Lutterworth to see brother-â€”, to converse with him about accompanying
him on a journey to the Continent, with reference to Missionary
objects. When I had come to this decision, I took another ride, the
horse being well again; but now this formerly quiet horse was
self-willed and shy, which does not at all suit me in the weak state
of my nervous system. As horse exercise had kept me here longer than
I had intended to stay, and as I cannot now ride on this horse which
before suited me so well, I see, even in this, in itself, trifling
circumstance, a confirmation that I had been right in my decision to
leave Oxford.

Feb. 16. Lutterworth. I arrived here on the evening of the 14th. I
have been decidedly worse since I have been here, and was obliged
again to have recourse to medicine. A brother having strongly
recommended me, whilst in Oxford, to go to Leamington on account of
my health, and having at the same time offered to pay my expenses
during my stay there, and being now so very unwell again, and so near
Leamington, I decided to-night upon accepting his kindness, provided
that my kind physician in Bristol had no objection.

Feb. 17. Leamington. I left Lutterworth this morning, where I have
received much kindness. There was no inside place, and I was very
unwell; but the fear of being quite laid up at Lutterworth, and
becoming burthensome to those dear saints who had received me into
their house though a stranger to them; and having still no desirable
medical advice; and the remembrance that the Lord had graciously
enabled me, even lately, to travel outside in cold weather; induced
me to get on the coach, and I rode off in a heavy fall of snow. But
God had mercy. After eight miles ride, at Rugby, I obtained an inside
place. The rest of the way was crowned with mercies. I had a room to
myself at Southam, found a suitable dinner just ready, had an inside
place to Leamington, and was preserved by the way, though the
coachman was quite intoxicated, and drove furiously.--I had asked the
Lord to let me find a suitable and cheap lodging at Leamington, and
the first lodging I saw I took, for which I pay only ten shillings
weekly. Thus, a few minutes after my arrival, I sat comfortably at my
own fireside. How very kind of the Lord!

Feb. 26. Yesterday and today I have suffered again in my head, though
I have been on the whole better since I have taken the Leamington
waters. But far more trying has been the internal conflict which I
have had. Grace fought against evil suggestions of one kind and
another, and prevailed; but it was a very trying season. This was
much increased by receiving neither yesterday nor today a letter from
my dear wife. Grace sought out for reasons why she had not written;
nevertheless it was a very trying season. Today I earnestly prayed to
God to send my wife to me, as I feel that by being alone, and
afflicted as I am in my bead, and thus fit for little mental
employment, Satan gets an advantage over me.

Feb. 27. God has had mercy upon me. The sore and sharp trial, the
very bitter conflict is over.--This morning also I received a letter,
which ought to have come yesterday, and which showed me that my dear
wife had not been remiss in writing. She announced her purpose of
coming today, and God, in mercy to me, brought her safely.

March 3. My head has been on the whole better these two weeks, than
it has been for several months; but still I am not well. I have
walked every day, for the last thirteen days, between three and four
hours a day, and by the mercy of God am able to do so, without much
fatigue.

March 11. My health is much the same. I am pretty well, but have no
mental energy.--I have read during the last weeks once more, with as
much or more interest than ever, I. and II. of Samuel, and I. and II.
of Kings.-â€”I have now, after repeated prayer, come to the conclusion,
(if brother Craik, to whom I have written, sees no objection, and if
my physician thinks it would be beneficial to my health,) to
accompany brother--to Germany, that thus; 1, I might aid him by my
advice in reference to the object of his journey; 2, that thus, if
the Lord will, through the journey and the benefit of my native air,
my health might be benefited; and 3, that I might once more have an
opportunity of setting the truth before my father and brother.

March 12. I feel quite comfortable in the prospect of going to
Germany. I trust it will prove to be as much of God, as it was shown
to have been the last time.

March 13. I had a letter today from brother Craik, who thinks it
desirable that I should go to Germany, but my physician says that I
should not go for a month or two, for that my mind ought not to be
burdened. I am in peace, and from this I see that the Lord has made
me willing to do His and not my own will. I wrote to brotherâ€”â€”the
result of today, and have now left it with him, whether he will wait,
or go on the 21st, as he purposes.

March 14â€”20. During these days, as before, I have continued to read
the Scriptures with prayer, i. e. turning what I read into prayer,
chiefly with a reference to myself. My days generally pass away in
peace. It is a trial to me, to have to care so much about my body;
but, on the whole, the Lord gives me grace to submit patiently, yet
not always. Today I saw again my medical adviser, who wishes me to
stay another week.

March 23, Today I received a letter from brother ----. He is not gone,
and will wait for me. I have increased assurance that I shall go to
Berlin, and have comfort in the thought.

March 24. A few days ago I had particular comfort in meditating on
the Lordâ€™s prayer in Luke (which came in the course of my
meditation), after having been tempted to pass it over, as it had
been the subject of my meditation a short time before.--Within the
last fortnight I have read with meditation and prayer from the 4th to
the 12th chapter of the Gospel by Luke.

April 2. For some time I have been getting weary of my stay here.
Yesterday I pleaded especially that word Psalm ciii. 13: "Like as a
father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him."
I begged God to pity me, and to release me from the necessity of
staying any longer at Leamington, if it might be. Today I saw my
physician, and he has allowed me to leave. Thus the Lord has granted
my request.

April 3. My dear Mary left for Bristol, and I for London, on my way
to Germany. I was led to read, this morning, Psalm cxxi. with my dear
wife before we separated, which we both felt to be very appropriate
to our circumstances.

April 6. This evening I went on board the steamer for Hamburg.

April 7. All the day ill from sea sickness.

April 8. Lordâ€™s day. I was able to get up this morning, and to take
my meals.--Last night I was led to praise God for having made me His
child, considering that I was most likely the only one on board that
knew Him. This morning, however, I found a sister in the Lord among
the passengers, with whom I had much conversation.--At dinner she
manifested more grace, in testifying against evil, than I did. At tea
time I had grace, in some measure, to speak of Jesus before the
company, and to confess Him as my Lord.

April 9. We arrived at Hamburg about one in the morning, having had a
most favourable passage of about 48 hours, and at seven I went on
shore. It had been repeatedly my prayer, that I might soon find out
brother ----, who had gone three days before me to Hamburg; and
immediately after my arrival, in answer to prayer, without any
difficulty, I found out where he lodged.

April 14. Berlin. We arrived here the evening before last. Having
been yesterday and this morning seeking for lodgings, without being
able to obtain any that were suitable, I at last became irritated.
Surely there was lack of earnest prayer on my part in this matter,
and want of patience in waiting the Lordâ€™s own time, and want of
openness, in not telling brother ---- that I was tired, and that, on
account of my weakness, I was unable thus to go about from place to
place. At last the Lord directed us to two suitable rooms, and I feel
now again comfortable, in my quiet retirement, after having confessed
my sin of irritability to the Lord and to brother ----.

April 15â€”21. We met several times during this week with certain
brethren who desire to give themselves to Missionary service, and
prayed and read the Scriptures with them, and made such remarks as
seemed to be important in connexion with the work. In addition to
this we saw the brethren privately at our lodgings, two, three, or
four at a time. But I have still felt the great weakness of my mental
powers, and have been only able to attend to this work about three
hours a day.--Since my arrival here I have had two letters from my
dear Mary. Harriet Culliford, one of the Orphans, and formerly one of
the most unpromising children, has been removed. She died as a true
believer, several of the brethren who saw her being quite satisfied
about her state. Surely this pays for much trouble and for much
expense! My wife also mentions some fresh instances of the Lordâ€™s
blessing resting upon my Narrative.--I am now, after prayer, this day,
April 21, quite sure that I should leave Berlin, and go to my father
at once, as the work here is too much for my head.

April 22nd. Confirmation-day of the children in Berlin. The son of
the person with whom we lodge was confirmed, and in the evening they
had the violin and dancing. How awful!â€”-A few days since I heard
that a brother in the Lord, an old friend of mine, and one of the two
alluded to in the first part of this Narrative, page 15, was in
prison on account of his religious views. This brought afresh before
me the privileges which the children of God enjoy in England.--I saw a
few days since another brother in prison, who, as an unconverted
young man, in the university, was once at a political club, and had
his name enrolled, in consequence of this, in the list of the
political students. Shortly afterwards he was converted, and gave up
all connexion with these political students. He finished his
university course and afterwards became a tutor to the sons of a
baron. In that family he had been for a considerable time, when one
night he was fetched by the police out of his bed and taken to
prison, on the ground of this his connexion with the political club
three or four years before. [The result was that he was for many
months in prison. Now he is a Missionary in the East Indies. I have
related this circumstance to remind the reader afresh, that though
the Lord freely and fully forgives us all our sins at once when we
believe, yet He may allow us to suffer the consequences of them in a
greater or less degree.]

April 24. Left Berlin last evening for Magdeburg, Had a long
conversation with two deists in the mail. God helped me to make a
full confession of His dear Son, in answer to prayer for grace to be
enabled to do so. This afternoon I arrived at Heimersleben, the small
town where my father lives. Once more then I have met with my dear
aged parent, who is evidently fast hastening to the grave, and seems
to me not likely to live through the next winter. I arrived just at
the time when, the Fair was held in the town. How great, how
exceedingly great, the difference in me, as to my feelings respecting
such things now, from what they were formerly!

April 25â€”28. Stay at Heimersleben. The Lord has given me both an
opportunity and grace to speak more fully, more simply, and more to
the heart of my father about the things of God, and in particular
about the plan of salvation, than I had ever done before. I trust
that, in judgment at least, he is convinced that there is something
lacking in him. All the time of my stay here he has been most
affectionate. I spoke also fully again to my poor brother, who is now
completely living in open sin. Oh to grace what a debtor am I!â€”-Brother
Knabe, who was the only believer in Heimersleben, as far as
I have been able to learn, died about eighteen months since.

April 28. Today I left for Magdeburg. My father accompanied me about
eight miles. Both of us, I think, felt, when about to separate, that
we were parting from each other, never again to meet on earth. How
would it have cheered the separation on both sides, were my dear
father a believer! But it made my heart indeed sad to see him, in all
human probability, for the last time, without having Scriptural
ground for hope respecting his soul.--I arrived in the afternoon at
Magdeburg, and went to a brother, a musician in one of the regiments
of that fortress, who is on the point of leaving the army to go to
the East Indies as a Missionary. In his lodgings I saw another
brother, a private soldier, who lives in the barracks, who told me,
on my enquiring, that he goes into the sand cellar, which is
perfectly dark, in order to obtain opportunity for secret prayer. How
great the privileges of those who may freely have both time and place
for retirement; but how great, at the same time, our obligation to
improve these opportunities!-â€”This evening at eight I went on board
an Elbe-steamer for Hamburg.

April 30. This morning at seven I arrived at Hamburg. Nothing
particular happened during the passage, except that we stuck fast, in
a shallow part of the river, through the carelessness of one of the
sailors; but the Lord heard prayer, and after a little while the
steamer could ply again.

May 1. Yesterday and today I spent in an hotel at Hamburg in writing
letters. I had also, though staying at an hotel, much real communion
with God in reading the Scriptures and in prayer. This evening I
embarked for London.

May 4. London. Left Hamburg on the 2nd. Had a fine passage. I have,
by the mercy of God, been kept from light and trifling conversation;
but I have not confessed the Lord Jesus as plainly as I ought to have
done. This afternoon I arrived at the house of my dear friends in
London, who received me with their usual kindness. After prayer I see
it my duty to leave tomorrow for Leamington, to see my physician
there once more, and then to go as soon as I can to Bristol.

May 5. Leamington. Through the mercy of the Lord the journey to
Germany, concerning which I had prayed so often, is now over, and I
am safely brought back again to this place.--It has been a wet and
cold day, but God has in mercy preserved me from injury, though I got
wet. I had some conversation with a clergyman on the coach; I
confessed the Lord Christ a little, but not plainly enough.--I had
asked the Lord to give me a quiet and cheap resting place in my
former lodgings, if it might be, and accordingly they were unlet.

May 7. This morning I left Leamington for Bristol. I had grace to
confess the Lord Jesus the last part of the way before several merry
passengers, and had the honour of being ridiculed for His sake. There
are few things in which I feel more entirely dependant upon the Lord,
than in confessing Him on such occasions. Sometimes I have, by grace,
had much real boldness; but often I have manifested the greatest
weakness, doing no more than refraining entirely from unholy
conversation, without, however, speaking a single word for Him who
toiled beyond measure for me. No other remedy do I know for myself
and any of my fellow-saints who are weak, like myself, in this
particular, than to seek to have the heart so full of Jesus, and to
live so in the realization of what He has done for us, that, without
any effort, out of the full heart, we may speak for Him.--I found my
dear family in peace.

May 8. This evening I went to the prayer meeting at Gideon. I read
Psalm ciii, and was able to thank the Lord publicly for my late
affliction. This is the first time that I have taken any part in the
public meetings of the brethren, since November 6th, 1837.

May 13. Today I was much helped in expounding the Scriptures
publicly. When I began I knew not how the Lord would deal with me,
whether I should be able to speak or not, as my head is still very
weak. But the Lord helped me. I did not feel any loss of mental
power. How gracious of the Lord to allow me again to commence serving
Him in the ministry of His word.--[For several months after this I
preached, on the whole, with much more enjoyment, and with much more
earnestness and prayerfulness, than I did before I was taken ill. I
also felt more the solemnity of the work.]

June 11. A stranger called on me, and told me, that, many years ago,
he had defrauded two gentlemen of a small sum, and that he wished to
restore the same with interest. He also stated that he had read my
Narrative, and, feeling confidence in me, he requested me to convey
this money to those gentlemen, giving me, at the same time, their
names and place of abode. He intrusted me with four sovereigns for
each of them. At the same time he gave me one sovereign for myself,
as a token of Christian love. I never saw the individual before, nor
do I up to this moment know his name. I conveyed this money, however,
not by post, as he wished but through two bank orders, in order that
thus I might be able to show, should it be needful, that I actually
did send the money; for in all such matters it becomes one to act
with particular caution.--It may be that this fact will be read by
some who have, like this stranger, before their conversion, defrauded
certain individuals. If so, let them like him, or like Zaccheus of
old, restore what they took, and, if they have the means, with
interest, or compound interest.

June 13. Last evening my dear wife was taken ill. Often had I prayed
respecting her hour, and now was the time to look out for the answer.
She continued in most severe sufferings from a little after nine
until midnight. Thus hour after hour passed away, until eleven this
morning. Another medical attendant was then called in, at the desire
of the one who attended her. At three in the afternoon she was
delivered of a still-born child.--The whole of the night I was in
prayer, as far as my strength allowed me. I cried at last for MERCY,
and God heard.

June 14. My dearest wife is alive, but I am depending upon God for
her life every moment. She is in much peace. A sister gave me this
evening 5l. on account of dear Maryâ€™s illness.--[Again we had not
thought it well to make pecuniary provision for this time, though at
no period of my life had I more abundant means of doing so than
during the last few months; but our gracious Father helped us
abundantly in this and in other instances, as I shall mention below.]

June 22. Today there was sent to us anonymously, by post, 5l. for our
own personal expenses, at this the time of our affliction, when our
expenses are so great. The donor accompanied the 5l. note with an
affectionate letter to my wife and myself.

July 6. My dear wife, who for more than a fortnight after her
delivery was so ill, that the two medical attendants came twice or
three times daily, seems now, humanly speaking, likely to recover,
and to be given back to me as from the dead. Lord, help me so to
receive her!

July 12. From the commencement of the establishment of the
Orphan-houses, up to the end of June 1838, the hand of the Lord was
seen in the abundance with which He was pleased to supply me with the
means for maintaining nearly 100 persons. Now, however, the time is
come when "the Father of the fatherless" will show His especial care
over them in another way.--The funds, which were this day twelvemonth
about 780l., are now reduced to about 20l.; but, thanks be to the
Lord, my faith is as strong, or stronger, than it was when we had the
larger sum in hand; nor has He at any time, from the commencement of
the work, allowed me to distrust Him. Nevertheless, as our Lord will
be inquired of, and as real faith is manifested as such by leading to
prayer, I gave myself to prayer with brother T---- of the Boyâ€™s
Orphan-House, who had called on me, and who, besides my wife, and
brother Craik, is the only individual to whom I speak about the state
of the funds. While we were praying, an orphan child from Frome was
brought, and some believers at Frome, having collected among them
5l., sent this money with the child. Thus we received the first
answer at a time of need. We have given notice for seven children to
come in, and purpose to give notice for five more, though our funds
are so low, hoping that God will look on our necessities. [Observe
how gently the Lord dealt with us, in that, when want approached, He
helped at once, in immediate answer to prayer, in order thus to
increase our confidence in Him; but, at the same time, to prepare us
for sharper trials of our faith.]

June 17 and 18. These two days we have had two especial prayer
meetings, from 6 to 9 in the evening, to commend publicly to the Lord
the Boysâ€™ Orphan-House. The meetings had been deferred until now, on
account of my illness. In the morning of the 18th I expounded, with
especial reference to children, 1 Samuel iii., before above 550
children, being our Orphan and Day-School children, and, as many as
could come, of those belonging to the Sunday-School. What a great
work! What an honour to be allowed to provide Scriptural instruction
for so many little ones. Lord, help me to make use of my talents for
the benefit of the rising generation, and let me serve my generation
according to Thy will!-â€”Our funds for the Orphans are now very low.
There are about 20l. in hand, and in a few days 30l. at least will be
needed; but I purposely avoided saying any thing about our present
necessities, and spoke only, to the praise of God, about the
abundance with which our gracious Father, "The Father of the
fatherless," has hitherto supplied us. This was done in order that
the hand of God, in sending help, may be so much the more clearly
seen.

July 22. This evening I was walking in our little garden, meditating
on Heb. xiii. 8, "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for
ever." Whilst meditating on His unchangeable love, power, wisdom,
&c.--and turning all, as I went on, into prayer respecting myself;
and whilst applying likewise His unchangeable love, and power, and
wisdom, &c., both to my present spiritual and temporal circumstances:â€”-all
at once the present need of the Orphan-Houses was brought to my
mind. Immediately I was led to say to myself, Jesus in His love and
power has hitherto supplied me with what I have needed for the
Orphans, and in the same unchangeable love and power He will provide
me with what I may need for the future. A flow of joy came into my
soul whilst realizing thus the unchangeableness of our adorable Lord.
About one minute after, a letter was brought me, enclosing a bill for
20l. In it was written: "Will you apply the amount of the enclosed
bill to the furtherance of the objects of your Scriptural Knowledge
Society, or of your Orphan Establishment, or in the work and cause of
our Master in any way that He Himself, on your application to Him,
may point out to you. It is not a great sum, but it is a sufficient
provision for the exigency of today; and it is for todayâ€™s
exigencies, that, ordinarily, the Lord provides. Tomorrow, as it
brings its demands, will find its supply, etc." [Of this 20l. I took
10l. for the Orphan fund, and 10l. for the other objects, and was
thus enabled to meet the expenses of about 34l. which, in connection
with the Orphan-Houses, came upon me within four days afterwards, and
which I knew beforehand would come.]

On July 26 sailed from Liverpool for the East Indies, for Missionary
service, twelve German brethren and three sisters, as the result of
the journey of brother ---- and myself to the Continent, in April last.

July 27. Yesterday the funds for the Orphans were reduced to 5l.
Blessed be God, my confidence in Him was unshaken! I received
yesterday 2l. 13s. Today I was going with my family for change of air
to Durdham Down, and thought it well, therefore, to take out any
money which there might be in the Orphan-Box in my house. When I
opened it, I found a ten pound note and three half crowns. I had been
waiting on God for means, both yesterday and today, and thus He has
again shown how willing He is to help.

Aug. 6. During this week I shall have to pay again at least 35l. for
the Orphans, and have but about 19l. towards it. My eyes are up to
the "Father of the fatherless." I believe He will help, though I knew
not how.

Aug. 7. How graciously has the Lord again appeared, and that in so
short a time! How has he sent help, from altogether unexpected
quarters! I have been praying yesterday and today earnestly,
beseeching the Lord now to appear, and show His power, that the
enemies might not say, "Where is now thy God?" I reminded Him
especially, that I had commenced the work that it might be seen, that
He, even in our day, is willing to answer prayer, and that the
provision for our Orphans might be a visible proof to all around us
of this truth. And now observe! Last evening brother Craik told me
that 10l. had been given him for the work in our hands; 5l. for the
Orphans, and 5l. for the Schoolâ€”Bibleâ€”and Missionary fund. Today,
having to pay 25l., and not having quite enough, when I went to
brother T---- for the money which he might have received, as I knew that
25s. had been given to him, I took with me the keys of the boxes in
the Orphan-Houses, to see whether the Lord had sent in a little. I
opened the box in the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, and found 1l. 7s. 5 Â½d.
Immediately after I received from brother T---- 13l. 19s. 10d., the
greater part of which, as he told me, had come in within the last few
days. Thus our adorable Lord has once more delivered; for I have now
even more than enough to meet the current expenses of this week.

Aug. 16. When today the account books of the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House were
brought, several days sooner than I had expected them, it was found
that there was 1l. 6s. 6d. due to the matron. Besides this, money was
to be advanced for house-keeping, and there was only 13s. 5 1/2d. in
hand. To this one of those connected with the work added 2l. This 2l.
13s. 5 1/2d. was sent to the matron, whilst we were waiting upon God
to send more help. In the evening the boxes at the Girlsâ€™ and
Infant-Orphan-Houses were opened, and in them was found 3l. 7s. 5
1/2d. Thus the Lord has kindly helped us again for two or three days.

Aug. 18. I have not one penny in hand for the Orphans. In a day or
two again many pounds will be needed. My eyes are up to the Lord.
Evening. Before this day is over, I have received from a sister 5l.
She had some time since put away her trinkets, to be sold for the
benefit of the Orphans. This morning, whilst in prayer, it came to
her mind, I have this 5l., and owe no man any thing, therefore it
would be better to give this money at once, as it may be some time,
before I can dispose of the trinkets. She therefore brought it,
little knowing that there was not a penny in hand, and that I had
been able to advance only 4l. l5s. 5d. for housekeeping in the
Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, instead of the usual 10l.; little knowing also,
that within a few days many pounds more will be needed. May my soul
be greatly encouraged by this fresh token of my gracious Lordâ€™s
faithfulness!

Aug. 20. The 5l. which I had received on the 18th, had been given for
house-keeping, so that today I was again penniless. But my eyes were
up to the Lord. I gave myself to prayer this morning, knowing that I
should want again this week at least 13l., if not above 20l. Today I
received 12l. in answer to prayer, from a lady who is staying at
Clifton, whom I had never seen before. Adorable Lord, grant that this
may be a fresh encouragement to me.

Aug. 23. Today I was again without one single penny, when 3l. was
sent from Clapham, with a box of new clothes for the Orphans.

Aug. 29. Today sixteen believers were baptized. Of all the baptisms
which we have had, this was, perhaps, the most remarkable. Among
those who were baptized was an aged brother of above 84 years, and
one above 70. For the latter his believing wife had prayed 38 years,
and at last the Lord answered her prayers in his conversion. Should
any believer who may read this, be on the point of growing weary in
prayer for his unconverted relatives, because of the answer being
delayed, the above fact may be instrumental in stirring up such a one
to give himself to prayer with renewed earnestness and strengthened
expectation. "In due season we shall reap, if we faint not." There
were also amongst those who were baptized a blind brother and sister,
and two very young persons.

Aug. 31. I have been waiting on the Lord for means, as the matronâ€™s
books from the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House have been brought, and there is no
money in hand to advance for house-keeping. But as yet the Lord has
not been pleased to send help. As the matron called today for money,
one of the labourers gave 2l. of his own, for the present necessities.

Sept. 1. The Lord in His wisdom and love has not yet sent help.
Whence it is to come, need not be my care. But I believe God will, in
due time, send help. His hour is not yet come. As there was money
needed in the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House also, the same brother, just alluded
to, gave 2l. for that also. Thus we were delivered at this time
likewise. But now his means are gone. This is the most trying hour
that as yet I have had in the work, as it regards means; but I know
that I shall yet praise the Lord for His help. I have mentioned my
arguments before Him, and my gracious Lord, "the Father of the
fatherless," will send help.

Sept. 3. This morning the Lord again helped by 2l., which another
labourer connected with the work gave. This 2l., together with
sixpence which had been given anonymously, was sent off to the
Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, where all the money must be gone. There came in
further 1l. 14s. 8d. in the course of the day, which was given to the
matron of the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House.

Sept. 5. Our hour of trial continues still. The Lord mercifully has
given enough to supply our daily necessities; but He gives by the day
now, and almost by the hour, as we need it. Nothing came in
yesterday. I have besought the Lord again and again, both yesterday
and today. It is as if the Lord said: "Mine hour is not yet come."
But I have faith in God. I believe that He surely will send help,
though I know not whence it is to come. Many pounds are needed within
a few days, and there is not a penny in hand. This morning 2l. was
given for the present necessities, by one of the labourers in the
work.--Evening: This very day the Lord sent again some help to
encourage me to continue to wait on Him, and to trust in Him. As I
was praying this afternoon respecting the matter, I felt fully
assured that the Lord would send help, and praised Him beforehand for
His help, and asked Him to encourage our hearts through it. I have
been also led yesterday and today to ask the Lord especially, that He
would not allow my faith to fail. A few minutes after I had prayed,
brother T---- came and brought 4l. 1s. 5d., which had come in, in
several small donations. He told me, at the same time, that tomorrow
the books will be brought from the Infant-Orphan-House, when money
must be advanced for housekeeping. I thought for a moment, it might
be well to keep 3l. of this money for that purpose. But it occurred
to me immediately, "Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof." The
Lord can provide, by tomorrow, much more than I need, and I
therefore sent 3l. to one of the sisters, whose quarterly salary was
due, and the remaining 1l. 1s. 5d. to the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House for
housekeeping. Thus I am still penniless. My hope is in God: He will
provide.

Sept. 6. This morning the books were brought from the
Infant-Orphan-House, and the matron sent to ask when she should fetch
them, implying, when they would have been looked over, and when money
would be advanced for housekeeping. I said "tomorrow," though I had
not a single penny in hand. About an hour after, brother T---- sent me a
note, to say that he had received 1l. this morning, and that last
evening a brother had sent 29lbs. of salt, 44 dozen of onions, and
26lbs. of groats.

Sept. 7. The time had come that I had to send money to the
Infant-Orphan-House, but the Lord had not sent any more. I gave,
therefore, the 1l. which had come in yesterday, and 2s. 2d. which had
been put into the box in my house, trusting to the good Lord to send
in more.

Sept. 8. Saturday evening. I am still in the hour of probation. It
has not pleased my gracious Lord to send me help as yet.--The evening
before last I heard brother Craik preach on Genesis xii., about
Abrahamâ€™s faith. He showed how all went on well, as long as Abraham
acted in faith, and walked according to the will of God; and how all
failed when he distrusted God. Two points I felt particularly
important in my case. 1. That I may not go any by-ways, or ways of my
own, for deliverance. I have about 220l. in the bank, which, for
other purposes in the Lordâ€™s work, has been entrusted to me by a
brother and a sister. I might take of this money, and say but to the
sister--and write but to the brother, that I have taken, in these my
straits, 20l., 50l., or 100l., for the Orphans, and they would be
quite satisfied (for both of them have liberally given for the
Orphans, and the brother has more than once told me, only to let him
know when I wanted money;) but this would be a deliverance of my own,
not Godâ€™s deliverance. Besides, it would be no small barrier to the
exercise of faith, in the next hour of trial. 2. I was particularly
reminded afresh, in hearing brother Craik, of the danger of
dishonouring the Lord in that very way in which I have, through His
grace, in some small measure brought glory to Him, even by trusting
in Him.--Yesterday and today I have been pleading with God eleven
arguments, why He would be graciously pleased to send help. My mind
has been in peace respecting the matter. Yesterday the peace amounted
even to joy in the Holy Ghost But this I must say, that the burden of
my prayer, during the last days, has been chiefly, that the Lord in
mercy would keep my faith from failing. My eyes are up to Him. He can
help soon. One thing I am sure of: In His own way, and in His own
time He will help. The arguments which I plead with God are:

1. That I set about the work for the glory of God, i e. that there
might be a visible proof, by God supplying, in answer to prayer only,
the necessities of the Orphans, that He is the living God, and most
willing, even in our day, to answer prayer; and that, therefore, He
would be pleased to send supplies.

2. That God is the "Father of the fatherless," and that He,
therefore, as their Father, would be pleased to provide. Psalm
lxviii. 5.

3. That I have received the children in the name of Jesus, and that,
therefore, He, in these children, has been received, and is fed, and
is clothed; and that, therefore, He would be pleased to consider
this. Mark ix. 36, 37.

4. That the faith of many of the children of God has been
strengthened by this work hitherto, and that, if God were to withhold
the means for the future, those who are weak in faith would be
staggered; whilst by a continuance of means, their faith might still
further be strengthened.

5. That many enemies would laugh, were the Lord to withhold supplies,
and say, did we not foretell that this enthusiasm would come to
nothing?

6. That many of the children of God, who are uninstructed, or in a
carnal state, would feel themselves justified to continue their
alliance with the world in the work of God, and to go on as
heretofore, in their unscriptural proceedings respecting similar
institutions, so far as the obtaining of means is concerned, if He
were not to help me.

7. That the Lord would remember that I am His child, and that He
would graciously pity me, and remember that I cannot provide for
these children, and that therefore He would not allow this burden to
lie upon me long without sending help.

8. That He would remember likewise my fellow-labourers in the work,
who trust in Him, but who would be tried were He to withhold supplies.

9. That He would remember that I should have to dismiss the children
from under our Scriptural instruction to their former companions.

10. That He would show, that those were mistaken who said, that, at
the first, supplies might be expected, while the thing was new, but
not afterwards.

11. That I should not know, were He to withhold means, what
construction I should put upon all the many most remarkable answers
to prayer, which He had given me heretofore in connexion with this
work, and which most fully have shown to me that it is of God.

In some small measure I now understand, experimentally, the meaning
of that word "how long," which so frequently occurs in the prayers of
the Psalms. But even now, by the grace of God, my eyes are up unto
Him only, and I believe that He will send help.

Sept. 10. Monday morning. Neither Saturday nor yesterday had any
money come in. It appeared to me now needful to take some steps on
account of our need, i.e., to go to the Orphan Houses, call the
brethren and sisters together, (who, except brother T----, had never
been informed about the state of the funds), state the case to them,
see how much money was needed for the present, tell them that amidst
all this trial of faith I still believed that God would help, and to
pray with them. Especially, also, I meant to go for the sake of
telling them that no more articles must be purchased than we have the
means to pay for, but to let there be nothing lacking in any way to
the children, as it regards nourishing food and needful clothing; for
I would rather at once send them away than that they should lack. I
meant to go for the sake also of seeing whether there were still
articles remaining which had been sent for the purpose of being sold,
or whether there were any articles really needless, that we might
turn them into money. I felt that the matter was now come to a solemn
crisis.--About half-past nine six-pence came in, which had been put
anonymously into the box at Gideon Chapel. This money seemed to me
like an earnest, that God would have compassion and send more. About
ten, after I had returned from brother Craik, to whom I had unbosomed
my heart again, whilst once more in prayer for help, a sister called
who gave two sovereigns to my wife for the Orphans, stating that she
had felt herself stirred up to come, and that she had delayed coming
already too long. A few minutes after, when I went into the room
where she was, she gave me two sovereigns more, and all this without
knowing the least about our need. Thus the Lord most mercifully has
sent us a little help, to the great encouragement of my faith. A few
minutes after I was called on for money from the Infant-Orphan-House,
to which I sent 2l., and 1l. 0s. 6d. to the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House,
and 1l. to the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House.

Brother Craik left Bristol today for a few days in company with
another brother. I should have gone with them for the sake of
obtaining some quiet for my head; but I must remain, to pass with my
dear Orphans through the trial; though these dear little ones know
nothing about it, because their tables are as well supplied as when
there was 800l. in the bank, and they have lack of nothing.

Today I saw a young brother who, as well as one of his sisters, had
been brought to the knowledge of the Lord through my Narrative.

Sept. 11. The good Lord, in His wisdom, still sees it needful to keep
us very low. But this afternoon brother T---- called, and told me that
one of our fellow-labourers had sold his metal watch, and two gold
pins, for 1l. 1s., that 9s. 6d. had come in, and that two of our
fellow-labourers had sent two lots of books of their own, 19 and 21
in number, to be sold for the Orphans. What an abundant blessing,
that in such a season of trial I have such fellow-labourers! This 1l.
10s. 6d. was given to the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House.

Sept. 12. Still the trial continues. Only 9s. came in today, given by
one of the labourers. In the midst of this great trial of faith the
Lord still mercifully keeps me in great peace. He also allows me to
see, that our labour is not in vain; for yesterday died Leah
Culliford, one of the orphans, about 9 years old, truly converted,
and brought to the faith some months before her departure.

Sept. 13. No help has come yet. This morning found it was absolutely
needful to tell the brethren and sisters about the state of the
funds, and to give necessary directions as to not going into debt,
etc. We prayed together, and had a very happy meeting. They all
seemed comfortable 12s. 6d. was taken out of the boxes in the three
houses, 12s. one of the labourers gave, and 1l. 1s. had come in for
needlework done by the children.

One of the sisters, who is engaged in the work, sent a message after
me, not to trouble myself about her salary, for she should not want
any for a twelvemonth. What a blessing to have such fellow-labourers!

Sept. 14. I met again this morning with the brethren and sisters for
prayer, as the Lord has not yet sent help. After prayer one of the
labourers gave me all the money he had, 16s., saying that it would
not be upright to pray, if he were not to give what he had. One of
the sisters told me, that in six days she would give 6l., which she
had in the Savingsâ€™ Bank for such a time of need. God be praised for
such fellow-labourers!-â€”Up to this day the matrons of the three
houses had been in the habit of paying the bakers and the milkman
weekly, because they had preferred to receive the payments in this
way, and sometimes it had thus been also with the butcher and grocer.
But now, as the Lord deals out to us by the day, we considered it
would be wrong to go on any longer in this way, as the weekâ€™s payment
might become due, and we have no money to meet it; and thus those
with whom we deal might be inconvenienced by us, and we be found
acting against the commandment of the Lord, "Owe no man anything."
Rom. xiii. 8. From this day, and hence-forward, whilst the Lord gives
to us our supplies by the day, we purpose therefore to pay at once
for every article as it is purchased, and never to buy anything
except we can pay for it at once, however much it may seem to be
needed, and however much those with whom we deal may wish to be paid
only by the week. The little which was owed was paid off this day.--When
I came home I found a large parcel of new clothes, which had
been sent from Dublin for the Orphans, a proof that tire Lord
remembers us still. We met again in the evening for prayer. We were
of good cheer, and still BELIEVE that the Lord will supply our need.

Sept. 15. Saturday. We met again this morning for prayer. God
comforts our hearts. We are looking for help. I found that there were
provisions enough for today and tomorrow, but there was no money in
hand to take in bread as usual, in order that the children might not
have newly baked bread. This afternoon one of the labourers, who had
been absent for several days from Bristol, returned, and gave 1l.
This evening we met again for prayer, when I found that 10s. 6d. more
had come in since the morning. With this 1l. 10s. 6d. we were able to
buy, even this Saturday evening, the usual quantity of bread, (as it
might be difficult to get stale bread on Monday morning,) and have
some money left. God be praised, who gave us grace to come to the
decision not to take any bread today, as usual, nor to buy any thing
for which we cannot pay at once. We were very comfortable, thankfully
taking this money out of our Fatherâ€™s hands, as a proof that He still
cares for us, and that, in His own time, He will send us larger sums.

Today, a brother kindly paid the bill for medical attendance on my
dear wife during her confinement. The same brother also had paid,
some weeks since, the second medical attendant, who was called in.
Thus the Lord, in various ways, sends help to us, showing continually
His fatherly care over us.

Sept. 16. Lordâ€™s day afternoon. We met again for prayer respecting
supplies for the Orphans. We are in peace, and our hope is in God,
that He graciously will appear, though but one shilling has come in
since last evening.

Sept. 17. The trial still continues. It is now more and more trying,
even to faith, as each day comes. Truly, the Lord has wise purposes
in allowing us to call so long upon Him for help. But I am sure God
will send help, if we can but wait. One of the labourers had had a
little money come in, of which he gave 12s. 6d.; another labourer
gave 11s. 8d., being all the money she had left: this, with 17s. 6d.,
which, partly, had come in, and, partly, was in hand, enabled us to
pay what needed to be paid, and to purchase provisions, so that
nothing yet, in any way, has been lacking. This evening I was rather
tried respecting the long delay of larger sums coming; but being led
to go to the Scriptures for comfort, my soul was greatly refreshed,
and my faith again strengthened, by the xxxivth Psalm, so that I went
very cheerfully to meet with my dear fellow-labourers for prayer. I
read to them the Psalm, and sought to cheer their hearts through the
precious promises contained in it.

Sept. 18. Brother T. had 25s. in hand, and I had 3s. This 1l. 8s.
enabled us to buy the meat and bread, which was needed; a little tea
for one of the houses, and milk for all; no more than this is needed.
Thus the Lord has provided not only for this day, but there is bread
for two days in hand. Now, however, we are come to an extremity. The
funds are exhausted. The labourers, who had a little money, have
given as long as they had any left.--Now observe how the Lord helped
us! A lady from the neighbourhood of London who brought a parcel with
money from her daughter, arrived four or five days since in Bristol,
and took lodgings next door to the Boysâ€™ Orphan-House. This afternoon
she herself kindly brought me the money, amounting to 3l. 2s. 6d. We
had been reduced so low as to be on the point of selling those things
which could be spared; but this morning I had asked the Lord, if it
might be, to prevent the necessity of our doing so. That the money
had been so near the Orphan-Houses for several days without being
given, is a plain proof that it was from the beginning in the heart
of God to help us; but, because He delights in the prayers of His
children, He had allowed us to pray so long; also to try our faith,
and to make the answer so much the sweeter. It is indeed a precious
deliverance. I burst out into loud praises and thanks the first
moment I was alone, after I had received the money. I met with my
fellow-labourers again this evening for prayer and praise; their
hearts were not a little cheered. This money was this evening
divided, and will comfortably provide for all that will be needed
tomorrow.

Sept. 20. Morning. The Lord has again kindly sent in a little. Last
evening was given to me 1s. 6d., and this morning 1l. 3s. Evening.
This evening the Lord sent still further supplies; 8l. 11s. 2 1/2d.
came in, as a further proof that the Lord is not unmindful of us.
There was in the box of the Girlsâ€™ Orphan-House 1l. 1s., and in that
of the Boysâ€™ Orphan-House 1l. 7s. 2 1/2d. One of the labourers, in
accordance with her promise this day week, gave 6l. 3s. About
eighteen months ago she saw it right no longer to have money for
herself in the Savingsâ€™ Bank, and she therefore, in her heart, gave
the money which she had there to the Orphan-Houses, intending to draw
it in a time of need. Some time since (she told me this evening) she
drew a part of it to buy several useful articles for the
Orphan-Houses; now the sum was reduced to 6l. When she found out the
present need, she went this day week to the Savingsâ€™ Bank, and gave
notice that she wished to draw her money today. Truly, as long as God
shall be pleased to give me such fellow-labourers, His blessing will
rest upon the work! This 8l. 11s. 2 1/2d. was divided this evening to
supply the three houses, and we thanked God, unitedly, for His help.

Sept. 22. Both yesterday and today we have again assembled for prayer
and praise. We are in no immediate want, but on the 29th 19l. 10s.
will be due for the rent of the three Orphan-Houses.--Today there was
only 4s. 7d. in hand for the other objects of the Institution, though
it was the pay-day for some of the teachers. My comfort was the
living God. During this week He had helped me so repeatedly and in
such a remarkable way, as it regards the Orphan-Houses, that it would
have been doubly sinful not to have trusted in Him for help under
this fresh difficulty. No money came in this morning. About two, the
usual time when the teachers are paid, a sovereign was given, with
which I went immediately to brother T. (who attends to this part of
the work), to pay at least in part, the weekly salaries. I found that
he had received a sovereign in the morning. By means of this
sovereign, together with the one which I had received just at the
moment when it was needed, we were helped through this day.

Sept. 25. Yesterday and the previous days we have continued to
assemble for prayer. In four days the rent for the Orphan-Houses will
be due, and we have nothing towards it; also, the housekeeping money
in the three houses is now again gone. May the Lord have compassion
on us, and continue to send us help! A little came in this morning:
there was found 9s. 6d. in the box in my house.

Sept. 27. The 9s. 6d. which came in the day before yesterday, was
given to the Infant-Orphan-House. Thus we were helped through that
day and yesterday. There was every thing that was needed in the
three houses; I had made particular enquiry; there was meat even for
today. We met yesterday again for prayer. Today I was not able to go,
on account of indisposition; I sent, therefore, to brother T. to
request him to divide the l8s. 6d., (10s. of which had come in last
evening, and 8s. 6d. of which we had in hand), between the three
matrons. This afternoon I hear of a fresh deliverance which the Lord
has wrought. About five weeks ago, a farmer applied for the admission
of an orphan-girl, his grand-daughter. As I knew, however, that he
had the means of providing for her, and as our Institution is only
for destitute orphans, I informed him that the child could only be
received, on condition of his paying 10l. a year for her support,
(which is about the average expense for the younger girls), and this,
quarterly, in advance.4 This morning he came, brought the child, and
paid 2l. 10s. in advance, and gave 1l. besides. Thus the Lord has
again most seasonably helped us in this our time of need. May He keep
the memory of these deliverances alive in our souls, and increase our
confidence in Him by every fresh one! In less than two days we have
to pay 19l. 10s. for rent! May the Lord keep us looking to Him, and
mercifully send help!

Sept. 29. Saturday evening. Prayer has been made for several days
past respecting the rent, which is due this day. I have been looking
out for it, though I knew not whence a shilling was to come. This
morning brother T. called on me, and, as no money had come in, we
prayed together, and continued in supplication from ten till a
quarter to twelve. Twelve oâ€™clock struck (the time when the rent
ought to have been paid), but no money had been sent. For some days
past I have repeatedly had a misgiving, whether the Lord might not
disappoint us, in order that we might be led to provide by the week,
or the day, for the rent. This is the second, and only the second,
complete failure as to answers of prayer in the work, during the past
four years and six months. The first was about the half-yearly rent
of Castle-Green school-room, due July 1, 1837, which had come in only
in part by that time. I am now fully convinced that the rent ought to
be put by daily or weekly, as God may prosper us, in order that the
work, even as to this point, may be a testimony. May the Lord, then,
help us to act accordingly; and may He now mercifully send in the
means to pay the rent!--Whilst in this matter our prayers have
failed, either to humble us, or to show us how weak our faith is
still, or to teach us, (which seems to me the most probable,) that we
ought to provide the rent beforehand; the Lord has given us again
fresh proofs, even this day, that He is mindful of us. There was not
money enough in the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House to take in bread, (we give
the bread to the children on the third day after it is baked); but
before the baker came, a lady called who had had some needlework done
by the children, and paid 3s. 11d., and thus the matron was able to
take in bread as usual. I found this morning 2s. in the box in my
house, our extremity having led me to look into it. One of the
labourers gave 13s. This 15s. was divided amongst the three matrons.
Thanks to the Lord, there is all which is needed for today and
tomorrow.

Sept. 30. We are not only poor as regards the Orphan-fund, but also
the funds for the other objects bring us again and again to the Lord
for fresh supplies. Today, when we had not a single penny in hand,
5l. was given for the other objects.

Oct. 2. Tuesday evening. The Lordâ€™s holy name be praised! He hath
dealt most bountifully with us during the last three days! The day
before yesterday 5l. came in for the Orphans. Of this I gave to each
house 10s. which supplied them before the provisions were consumed.
Oh! how kind is the Lord. Always, before there has been actual want,
He has sent help. Yesterday came in 1l. 10s. more. This 1l. 10s.,
with 4s. 2d. in hand, was divided for present necessities. Thus the
expenses of yesterday, for housekeeping, were defrayed. The Lord
helped me also to pay yesterday the 19l. 10s. for the rent. The means
for it were thus obtained. One of the labourers had received through
his family 10l., and 5l. besides from a sister in the Lord; also some
other money. Of this he gave 16l., which, with the 3l. 10s. that was
left of the above-mentioned 5l., which came in the day before
yesterday, made up 19l. 10s., the sum which was needed.

--This day we were again greatly reduced. There was no money in hand
to take in bread as usual, for the Boysâ€™ and Infant Orphan-Houses,
but again the Lord helped. A sister who had arrived this afternoon
from Swansea brought 1l. 7s., and one of the labourers sold an
article, by means of which he was able to give 1l. 13s. Thus we had
3l.:â€”-1l. for each house, and could buy bread before the day was
over. Hitherto we have lacked nothing!

Oct. 4. Thursday. The money of Tuesday helped us through yesterday.
Today, when again all was gone, and help was greatly needed, our
loving Lord appeared. The books which had been given some time since,
by some of my fellow-labourers, were sold for 11s., also an old
bedstead for 2s. 6d., and an old sofa for 10s. The boxes were also
opened, as I had been told some money had been put in, and 9s. 1d.
was found in them. This money was a fresh encouragement to us in our
need. By this 1l. 12s. 7d. we were helped through the day.

Oct. 5. This morning, just before I was going to the Orphan-Houses to
meet with the brethren and sisters for prayer, 1l. 3s. was brought
from Teignmouth. This money seems to have been given some months
since to a brother at Teignmouth, but it did not reach me until
today. It is a most seasonable help, to defray the expenses of this
day, and a fresh proof, that not in anger, but only for the trial of
our faith, our gracious Lord delays as yet, to send larger sums.

Oct. 6. Saturday. The Lord has again most kindly helped us. It came
to my mind that there were some new blankets in the Orphan-Houses,
which had been given some time since, but which are not needed, and
might therefore be sold. I was confirmed in this by finding that the
moth had got into one pair. I therefore sold ten pairs, having a good
opportunity to do so. Thus the Lord not only supplied again our
present need for the three houses, but I was also able to put by the
rent for this week and the next, acting out the light which He had
given us this day week. There came in 9s. 6d., besides 7l. for the
blankets. The School fund, also, was again completely exhausted, when
today and yesterday came in so much, that not only the weekly
salaries could be paid today, but also above 1l. could be put by for
rent.

Oct. 9. Through the last-mentioned supplies for the Orphans we were
helped up to this day; but today we were brought lower than ever. The
provisions would have lasted out only today, and the money for milk
in one of the houses could only be made up by one of the labourers
selling one of his books. The matron in the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House had
this morning two shillings left. When in doubt whether to buy bread
with it, or more meat, to make up the dinner with the meat which she
had in the house, the baker called, and left three quarterns of bread
as a present. In this great need, some money having been given to one
of the labourers, he gave 2l. of it, by which we were able to buy
meat, bread, and other provisions. Nevertheless even this day, low as
we had been brought, before this 2l. was given, there had been all in
the house that was needed.

Oct. 10. The Lord had sent in so much since yesterday afternoon, that
we were able at our meeting this morning to divide 2l. 0s. 2d.
between the three matrons, whereby we are helped through this day.
But now the coals in the Infant-Orphan-House are out, and nearly so
in the other two houses. Also the treacle casks in all the three
houses are nearly empty. On this account we have asked the Lord for
fresh supplies.

Oct. 11. The "Father of the fatherless" has again shown his care over
us. An Orphan from Devonshire arrived last evening. With her was sent
2l. 5s. 6d. The sister who brought her gave also a silver tea-pot,
sugar-basin, and cream jug (of the weight of 48 oz.), having found
true riches in Christ. There was also in the boxes 9s. One of the
labourers paid for a ton of coals. We obtained 16l. 16s. for the
silver articles.--Thus we were helped through the heavy expenses of
the following days.

Oct. 12. Today seven brethren and sisters were added to us in
fellowship, and eight were proposed. May the Lord send helpers for
the work!

Oct. 13. For three months past the Orphan fund has been low, yet
hitherto we have lacked nothing!

Oct. 15. I knew that there would be money needed this morning, for
many things in the Orphan-Houses, and my heart was therefore lifted
up to the Lord. Just when I was going to meet my fellow labourers for
prayer, I received from Trowbridge 4l. There had come in also at the
Orphan-Houses 7s. 3d. To this one of the labourers added 1l. Thus I
was enabled abundantly to supply all that was wanted, and to pay for
a cask of treacle and a ton of coals. We are now, however, cast again
on the love of our Lord for further supplies, as there is neither any
thing in hand, nor have the labourers any more of their own to give.

Oct. 16. The day commenced with mercies. I was looking up to the Lord
for help, early this morning, when, almost immediately afterwards,
brother T. came, and brought two silver table-spoons, and six
tea-spoons, which had been left, anonymously, yesterday afternoon, at
the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House. This afternoon I received 12l. from
Staffordshire. On the seal of the letter, which enclosed the money,
was "Ebenezer." How true in our case! Surely this instance is a fresh
"Ebenezer" to us; for hitherto the Lord has helped us.--There was also
found a half sovereign in the box at my house. Also a lady left 5s.
at the door of the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, with about 200 pears for the
children; and a brother sent 2s., the first fruits of the increase of
his wages. Thus I was able to give a larger supply than usual to the
matrons.

Oct. 22. Today our funds were again quite low. In the
Infant-Orphan-House only 2d. was left, and very little in the other
two houses. But the Lord most manifestly again answered prayer. A
gentleman from London, who is greatly interested about destitute and
neglected children, came over from Bath with two of his sisters to
see the Orphan-Houses. He gave 1l. There was 2s. 6d. put into the box
at my house, and 6d. anonymously into the box at Gideon Chapel. With
this 1l. 3s. I went directly to the Orphan-Houses to relieve the
present need. Whilst I was there, the Lord gave still further
supplies; for being informed that in the morning some ladies had seen
the houses, and put money into the boxes, I opened them and found 3l.
0s. ld. Thus the Lord, by means of this 4l. 3s. 1d., helped us
through the necessities of this day.

Oct. 23. The Lord again sent above 2l., which supplied this dayâ€™s
necessities.

Oct. 24. Today the Lord sent from a most unexpected quarter 5l. The
money was given by a relative of two children in the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House.
Thus we are helped for two days, and are able to put by the rent
for this week.

Oct. 27. Saturday. This day we have been again mercifully helped,
though our need has been almost greater than ever. But, thanks to our
adorable Lord! this day also we have not been confounded; for there
was 6s. in the box at the Infant-Orphan-House, and 6s. came in for
things which had been given to be sold. To this one of the labourers
added 18s. By means of this 1l. 10s. we have been able to meet all
pressing demands, and to procure provisions for today and tomorrow.

Oct. 29. Monday. The Lord has again given us this day our daily
bread, though, in the morning, there was not the least natural
prospect of obtaining supplies. One of the labourers, who had
received some money for his own personal expenses, gave 2l. Some
things also, which had been given for sale, had been sold for 18s.;
and 6d. had been put into the box at Gideon Chapel This 2l. 18s. 6d.
enabled us to meet the expenses of this day. There were also many
articles of worn clothes sent.

Oct. 30. This has been again a day of peculiar mercies in reference
to the funds. Whilst I was in prayer respecting them, a brother
brought 2 1/4 yards of cloth. He had bought it for himself, but,
afterwards considering that he had sufficient clothes, he gave it to
be sold for the Orphans. This evening a sister gave me 20l., ten of
which were for the Orphans, and ten for the other objects. Thus we
are helped for this week.

Nov. 4. Lordâ€™s day. There was given, by a stranger, last Wednesday
evening, at Bethesda Chapel, to one of the sisters, a sovereign for
the Orphans, which I received today. Thus the Lord has again begun
the week with mercy, and His love surely will help us through it,
though again many pounds will be needed.

Nov. 5. Monday. By means of the sovereign which had come in
yesterday, and several small donations today and on the past days,
together with 2l. 10s. which one of the labourers added of his own,
6l. 2s. 6d. was divided this day between the three matrons, which
will supply their need for two days at least.

Nov. 7. The funds are now again completely exhausted. Today I divided
1l. 3s. 8d., which had come in yesterday; thus the necessary wants
were supplied. The Lord be praised who has helped us hitherto! One of
the Orphans was sent today to service, and the Lord enabled us to
give her a suitable outfit.

Nov. 8. Last evening 1l. 4s. came in, which, being divided between
the three houses, helped us through this day.

Nov. 10. Saturday. All seemed to be dark, so far as regards natural
appearances, at the commencement of this day. But through this day
also the Lord has helped us, and enabled us to meet all demands. In
the course of the day came in 1l. 8s. 6d. To this two of the
labourers added 10s. each, and thus we were brought to the close of
one more week, having been able to supply the necessities of 97
persons in the Orphan-Houses, without owing any thing.

Nov. 12. Monday. Sixpence came in this morning, to which one of the
labourers added 10s. 6d., to meet the most pressing necessities. This
evening I found the 1l. was not enough to take in bread for the
Boysâ€™-Orphan-House. The Lord gave us, however, before the day was
over, enough to buy the usual quantity of bread; for there was found
in the boxes 5s. 9d. and a pair of small gold earrings.

Nov. 13. This morning our want was again great. I have 20l. in hand
which has been put by for rent, but, for the Lordâ€™s honour, I would
not take of it. Nothing had come in, and the labourers had scarcely
any thing to give. I went, however, to the Orphan-Houses, to pray
with my fellow labourers, and, if it might be, to comfort them, and
see what could be done. When I came there, I found that 19s. 6d. had
come in this morning. On enquiry I heard that only 2s. 6d. more was
needed to carry us through the day. This one of the labourers was
able to add of his own. Thus the Lord has again helped us out of our
difficulty. One of the labourers gave some things which he could do
without, and another gave a workbox to be sold for the Orphans.--Before
this day has come to an end, the Lord has sent in 1l. 2s. 4d. more, so
that we have also a little for tomorrow.

Nov. 15. The money which had come in the day before yesterday,
supplied the necessities of yesterday also; but today we were brought
again very low. I went to the Orphan-Houses, to pray with my
fellow-labourers, not without hope that the Lord might have appeared,
and sent a little help. When I arrived I found that one of the
labourers had sold a few of his books, together with two which had
been given by another labourer on the 13th, for which he had received
7s. To this one of the labourers added 7s. 9d. This 14s. 9d. supplied
the most pressing necessities. When I came home I found 1s. in the
box at my house, and soon after received 5s. for a pair of fire
screens, which had been given for sale. There were also three baskets
of potatoes sent to the three different houses. A sack of potatoes
had been ordered, but the brother, who had been desired to bring
them, could not conveniently do so today, and thought, as this
present had been ordered from him, there would be no immediate need
of them; and Oh! how kind of the Lord to order it thus: for had he
brought them, the payment would have taken away the money which was
intended for the usual quantity of bread. But before the day was
over, the Lord helped still further. In the afternoon a gentleman
from Bath called at the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, and gave a cheque for 3l.
There was also 1s. given; 2s. 6d. came in for needle-work, and 5s.
6d. for things sold. Thus altogether 4l. 4s. 9d. has been sent by the
Lord this day.

Nov. 17. Saturday. Today above 3l. was needed, and as only 15s. 6d.
had come in, we found it needful to determine to dispose of a few
articles of furniture which we conveniently could do without. One of
the labourers gave a good watch to be sold, which she had bought some
months since, there being then no time-piece in one of the houses. In
consideration of these articles to be sold, I took, for the present
necessities of the Orphans, 2l. 10s. of the money which had been put
by for the rent, to be replaced when these articles could be sold at
a suitable opportunity. Thus we were helped to the close of one more
week.

Nov. 19. Today we were again in great need. There had come in only
7s. 6d. for needle-work. The Lord had, however, given to one of the
labourers a little money, of which he gave 15s., by means of which we
were helped through this day also.

Nov. 20. Today our need was exceedingly great, but the Lordâ€™s help
was great also. I went to meet with the brethren and sisters as
usual. I found that 1l. would be needed to supply the necessities of
today, but 3s. only had come in. Just when we were going to pray, one
of the labourers came in, who, after prayer, gave 10s. Whilst we were
praying, another labourer came in, who had received 1l. Thus we had
1l. 13s.; even more, therefore, than was absolutely needed.

Nov. 21. Never were we so reduced in funds as today. There was not a
single halfpenny in hand between the matrons of the three houses.
Nevertheless there was a good dinner, and, by managing so as to help
one another with bread, etc., there was a prospect of getting over
this day also; but for none of the houses had we the prospect of
being able to take in bread. When I left the brethren and sisters at
one oâ€™clock, after prayer, I told them that we must wait for help,
and see how the Lord would deliver us at this time. I was sure of
help, but we were indeed straitened. When I came to Kingsdown, I felt
that I needed more exercise, being very cold; wherefore I went not
the nearest way home, but round by Clarenceplace. About twenty yards
from my house, I met a brother who walked back with me, and after a
little conversation gave me 10l. to be handed over to the brethren,
the deacons, towards providing the poor saints with coals, blankets
and warm clothing; also 5l. for the Orphans, and 5l. for the other
objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. The brother had
called twice while I was gone to the Orphan-Houses, and had I now
been one half minute later, I should have missed him. But the Lord
knew our need, and therefore allowed me to meet him. I sent off the
5l. immediately to the matrons.

Nov. 23. The above-mentioned 5l., with an addition of 11s. 6d. which
had also come in, helped us through the expenses of yesterday and
today.

Nov. 24. This again has been a very remarkable day. We had as little
in hand this morning as at any time, and yet several pounds were
needed. But God, who is rich in mercy, and whose word so positively
declares that none who trust in Him shall be confounded, has helped
us through this day also. While I was in prayer, about ten in the
morning, respecting the funds, I was informed that a gentleman had
called to see me. He came to inform me that a lady had ordered three
sacks of potatoes to be sent to the Orphan Houses. Never could they
have come more seasonably. This was an encouragement to me, to
continue to expect help. When I came to the prayer meeting about 12
oâ€™clock, I heard that 2s. had come in, also 1l. for a guitar, which
had been given for sale. The payment for this guitar had been
expected for many weeks. It had been mentioned among us, repeatedly,
that it might come just at a time, when we most needed it: and oh!
how true. Also the watch which had been given was sold for 2l. 10s.
But with all this we could not have put by the rents for this week,
amounting to 30s. One of the labourers, therefore, gave his watch to
the Orphan-fund under this condition, that should the Lord not enable
us before Dec. 21st to make up this deficiency, it should be sold,
but not otherwise, as he needs it in the Lordâ€™s service.--[A few days
after the Lord gave the means to put by the 30s., and 30s. besides
for the next weekâ€™s rent.] Thus the Lord helped us through this day,
and with it brought us to the close of one more week.

Nov. 25. Lordâ€™s-day. The Lord kindly remembers us before there is
absolute need. A sister who is going to leave Bristol, called on me
to bid me farewell, and gave me, in parting, 1l. 10s. for the
Orphans. It is remarkable, that almost every donation given within
the last four months and thirteen days, since our funds have been
low, has come from unexpected quarters, to make the hand of God so
much the more manifest.

Nov. 26. Though there had come in yesterday 1l. 10s., yet that was
scarcely the half of what was needed this day. But the Lord knew our
circumstances, and, as He is wont to do, most unworthy as we are of
it, remembered our need. There was given 1l. this morning, and 1s.
had been put anonymously into the box at Gideon Chapel; and a lamp,
which had been given some time since, had been sold for 10s. Also 1s.
2d. came in for needlework. By means of these several little sums we
could meet all the demands of this day.

Nov. 27. Yesterday afternoon came in 10s., and this morning, by the
disposal of some articles, which had been given for sale, 12s. This
furnished us with means to procure, for this day also, the necessary
supplies.

Nov. 28. This is, perhaps, of all days the most remarkable as yet, so
far as it regards the funds. When I was in prayer this morning
respecting them, I was enabled firmly to believe that the Lord would
send help, though all seemed dark as to natural appearances. At 12
oâ€™clock I met as usual with the brethren and sisters for prayer.
There had come in only 1s., which was left last evening anonymously,
at the Infant Orphan-House, and which, except 2d., had already been
spent, on account of the great need. I heard also that an individual
had gratuitously cleaned the time-piece in the Infant Orphan-House,
and had offered to keep the timepieces of the three houses in repair.
Thus the Lord gave even in this a little encouragement, and a proof
that He is still mindful of us. On inquiry I found that there was
every thing needful for the dinner in all the three houses; but
neither in the Infant nor Boysâ€™ Orphan-Houses was there bread enough
for tea, nor money to buy milk. Lower we had never been, and,
perhaps, never so low. We gave ourselves now unitedly to prayer,
laying the case in simplicity before the Lord. Whilst in prayer there
was a knock at the door, and one of the sisters went out. After the
two brethren, who labour in the Orphan-Houses, and I had prayed
aloud, we continued for a while silently in prayer. As to myself, I
was lifting up my heart to the Lord to make a way for our escape, and
in order to know, if there were any other thing which I could do with
a good conscience, besides waiting on Him, so that we might have food
for the children. At last we rose from our knees. I said, "God will
surely send help." The words had not quite passed over my lips, when
I perceived a letter lying on the table, which had been brought
whilst we were in prayer. It was from my wife, containing another
letter from a brother with 10l. for the Orphans. The evening before
last I was asked by a brother whether the balance in hand for the
Orphans would be as great this time, when the accounts would be made
up, as the last time. My answer was, that it would be as great as the
Lord pleased. The next morning this brother was moved to remember the
Orphans, and to send today 10l., which arrived after I had left my
house, and which on account of our need was forwarded immediately to
me. Thus I was enabled to give 6l. 10s. for housekeeping, and to put
by 3l. 10s. for rent.

The brother who sent the 10l. for the Orphans, sent likewise 10l. to
be divided between brother Craik and me, with the object of
purchasing new clothes for ourselves.

Nov. 29. The Lord has greatly blessed our meetings for prayer. They
have been instrumental in leading us to much prayer for the children
in the Orphan-Houses, in the Day-Schools, and in the Sunday-School.
They have led us to prayer for ourselves, for the Day-School
Teachers, and for the Sunday-School Teachers, that grace may be given
to us so to walk before the children, and so to deal with them, as
that the Lord may be glorified by us. We have also often been led to
intercede for the believers with whom we are in fellowship, and for
the Church at large. We have especially prayed, that our work may
lead the church generally to a more simple confidence and trust in
the Lord. That these meetings have not been in vain, as regards the
procuring of funds, has been already sufficiently seen by the many
instances which have been recorded in the foregoing pages. Today,
however, we have had another particular proof of this. When we met I
found that 10s. had come in yesterday afternoon. When I returned home
I found 1l. had come in, and shortly after I received another 1l. In
the evening I received 50l., which was sent from Suffolk by a sister
who had often expressed how gladly she would contribute more largely
to the work which is in our hands, had she the means, and who just
now, in this our time of need, has obtained the means to carry out
the desire of her heart. I rejoice in the last donation particularly,
not because of the largeness of the sum, but because it enables me to
pay to my brethren and sisters in the Orphan-Houses the salary which
is due to them. For though they are willing to labour without any
remuneration, nevertheless "the labourer is worthy of his reward."
This donation also proves, that the Lord is willing even now, as
formerly, to send large sums. But I expect still larger. The same
sister who sent the 50l. for the Orphans, sent, at the same time,
30l. to be divided between brother Craik and me for our personal
expenses. How abundantly does the Lord care for us! Truly we serve a
kind Master!

Dec. 5. Today there were again a few shillings needed, in the Boysâ€™
Orphan-House. That which remained of the Â£50l. had been divided for
housekeeping in the three houses, and was now all spent in the Boysâ€™
Orphan-House, and nearly also in the other two houses. The few
shillings which were needed in the Boysâ€™ Orphan-House, the Lord,
however, had previously provided by the little which had come in on
December 3 and 4.

Dec. 6. This day our need was again as great as ever, but the
deliverance of the Lord was also as manifest as ever. No money had
come in, and I knew there would be some needed this morning in all
the three houses. That which was required to buy provisions for
today, was about 1l.; but there were also coals needed in two
houses, and two of the treacle-casks were empty. We gave ourselves,
as usual, to prayer. After prayer one of the labourers gave 1l. of
the salary which she had received a few days ago; another gave 6s.,
and 4s. 6d. was taken out of the boxes. Thus we had 1l. 10s. 6d. to
divide, and therefore more than was absolutely needed; also one of
the labourers had ordered half a ton of coals to be sent to the Boysâ€™
Orphan-House, for which he paid himself.

This afternoon I received 100l. from a sister; 50l. for the Orphans,
and 50l. for the Schoolâ€”Bibleâ€”and Missionary-Fund. This same sister,
who earns her bread with her own hands, had given, on October 5,
1837, 50l. towards the Boysâ€™ Orphan-House, and gave for the
necessities of the poor saints, in August, 1838, 100l. more; for she
had been made willing to act out those precious exhortations: "Having
food and raiment let us be therewith content." "Sell that ye have,
and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure
in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither
moth corrupteth." "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth,
where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and
steal: but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither
moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through
nor steal." Respecting the 50l. which has been given of this sum for
the Schoolâ€”Bibleâ€”and Missionary-Fund, it is worthy of remark, that we
would not order Reference Bibles till we had the means. We had
repeatedly prayed respecting this want of Bibles, and particularly
again this morning. It had been also much laid on our hearts today,
to request that the Lord would enable us to have the Report printed,
which we could not do, unless He first sent the means. Lastly, we had
also repeatedly asked Him to supply us so largely, if it were His
will, as that at the time of the public meetings we might be able to
speak again of abundance. For though for some months past the time
has been fixed for the public meetings, without any reference to the
state of the funds, nevertheless, it might have had the appearance,
that we had convened the brethren for the sake of telling them about
our poverty, and thus to induce them to give.

Dec. 8, 1838. The Lord closes the third year of this part of the work
with blessings. Yesterday was sent 24 yards of flannel, and today
were taken out of the box in the Boysâ€™ Orphan-House a 5l. note and
3d. Also 2s. was given, and 1l. besides.

Dec. 11, 12, and 13. On the evenings of these three days there were
public meetings, at which I gave an account of the Lordâ€™s dealing
with us in reference to the Orphan-Houses and the other objects of
the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. As the work, and particularly
that of the Orphan-Houses, was begun for the benefit of the church at
large, it appeared well to us, that from time to time it should be
publicly stated how the Lord had dealt with us in reference to it;
and as on Dec. 9th the third year had been completed, since the
commencement of the Orphan work, this seemed to be a suitable time
for having these meetings.

Should any one suppose, in reading the plain details of the trials
through which we passed during the four months previous to Dec. 9,
1838, respecting the Orphan-Houses, that I have been disappointed as
it regards my expectations, as far as the funds are concerned: my
answer is, that the reverse is the case. For straits were expected.
Long before the trials came, I had more than once stated publicly,
that answers to prayer, in the time of need,--the manifestation of
the hand of God, stretched out for our help,--was just the very end
for which the Institution was established.

I further state, that the Orphans have never lacked any thing. Had I
had thousands of pounds in hand, they would have fared no better than
they have; for they have always had good nourishing food, the
necessary articles of clothing, etc.

It is now (namely on Dec. 10, 1838) four years and nine months since
brother Craik and I established the Scriptural Knowledge Institution.
The reasons which we had for doing so were, that thus a testimony
might be borne that the children of God need not to go to unbelievers
to ask them for money; nor require the patronage of the great men of
this world in the Lordâ€™s work; and that, further, believers generally
might be stirred up, to renounce their alliance with the world in the
management and promotion of religious objects, and that, lastly, it
might be seen, that, without contracting debts, such objects can be
carried on.

Painful as it was, and as it still is, to us, to be obliged to differ
from so many of our brethren, in these particulars, nevertheless we
were called upon to work without them, if we could not conscientiously
work with them. May the Lord grant, that the eyes of many of His children
may be opened, so that they may seek, in all spiritual things, to be
separated from unbelievers, (2 Cor. vi. 14â€”18), and to do Godâ€™s work
according to Godâ€™s mind!

I notice briefly the following particulars respecting the first three
objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. 1. There is at
present (in December, 1838) a Sunday School supported by it, which
contains four hundred and sixty-three children. This part of the work
calls for particular thanksgiving; for during these last eighteen
months the number of the children has been nearly three times as
great as it used to be. Five of the scholars have been converted
within the last two years, and are now in fellowship with the church,
and three of them are teachers in the school. 2. There is in
connection with the Institution an Adult-school, in which, since the
commencement of the work, above 120 adults have been instructed, and
in which at present twelve are taught to read. 3. The Institution has
entirely supported, since its commencement, several Day-schools for
poor children, and within the last two years six of such: three for
boys, and three for girls.--The number of all the children that have
had schooling in the Day-schools through the medium of the
Institution, since its formation, amounts to 1534; the number of
those at present in the six Day. Schools is 342. 4. During the last
two years there have been circulated, 1884 copies of the Scriptures
in connexion with the Institution, and since the beginning of the
work, March 5, 1834, five thousand and seventy-eight copies. 5. For
Missionary purposes have been laid out Â£74. 18s. 4d. 6. The total of
the income for the first three objects, during the last two years,
was Â£1129. 13s. 1d. The total of the expenses Â£1111. 13s. 7 1/2d.

There are, at present, 86 Orphans in the three houses, i. e. 31 in
the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, 31 in the Infant-Orphan-House, and 24 in the
Boysâ€™-Orphan-House.

The whole number of Orphans, who have been under our care, from April
11, 1836, to Dec. 9, 1838, amounts to 110.

Godâ€™s blessing has most manifestly rested upon this part of the work.
For, 1. Without any one having been asked for any thing by us, the
sum of Â£2111 5s. 4 1/2d. has been given to us, entirely as the result
of prayer to God.

2. Besides this, also, many articles of clothing, furniture,
provisions, etc. 3. Without our solicitation three medical gentlemen,
(one for each house), have, up to Dec. 9, 1838, kindly given their
attendance and medicines gratuitously.

4. The children have been, on the whole, in good health, and many of
them have greatly improved as to their health, since they have been
with us. 5. Though most of them had been brought up in a very
different manner from what one could desire, yet God has constrained
them, on the whole, to behave exceedingly well, so much so that it
has attracted the attention of all observers. This can be ascribed
only to the good hand of God. 6. There are a few among them,
respecting whom we have a comfortable assurance that they care about
their souls. 7. There is not one of those who have died, of whom we
are without hope, as it regards their eternal welfare; but respecting
two of them we have especial reason to rejoice. The elder of the two,
Harriet Culliford, about twelve years of age when she died, had been
for many months wasting away in consumption. She was, almost during
the whole time of her illness, completely careless about the things
of God; nothing seemed to make any impression upon her, though a well
behaved child in other respects. About a fortnight before her
departure, she was brought to know the Lord, gave the fullest
evidence, that could be given in her circumstances, of a real change
of heart, and departed full of joy at the prospect of being with the
Lord, though previously she had been very desirous to be restored
again. The younger, Leah Culliford, (both of them of a very
consumptive family), fell asleep in Jesus on Sept. 11, 1838. She was
but little more than eight years of age; but many weeks before her
death she gave evidence to those who were placed over her of a change
of heart, and of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

The total of the income for the Orphans, from Dec. 9, 1836, to Dec.
9, 1838, has amounted to Â£1341. 4s. 7d. the total ofâ€™ the expenses to
Â£1664. 4s. 0 3/4d. There was two years ago a balance of Â£373. 4s. 8
1/4d. in hand, and now the balance is Â£50. 5s. 3d.

Dec. 16. There was a paper anonymously put into the box at Bethesda
Chapel, containing 4l. 10s. In the paper was written "For the Rent of
the Orphan-Houses, from Dec. 10 to Dec. 31, 1838. â€˜O taste and see
that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusteth in Him!" In
order that the reader may be able to enter into the value of this
donation, I would request him to read over once more, what I wrote
under "Sept. 29 of this year." [The individual who gave this 4l. 10s.
for the rent of the Orphan-Houses for the first three weeks after the
public meetings, at which the matter about the rent, for the
instruction of the brethren, was fully stated, continued for three
years, up to Dec. 10, 1841, to give regularly, but anonymously, 1l.
10s. a week for the same purpose, which was exactly the sum required
every week for the rent of those three houses. Thus the Lord rewarded
our faithfulness, in carrying out the light which He had given us.
But the chief blessing, resulting from this circumstance, I consider
to be this, that several brethren, who earn their bread by the labour
of their hands, have learned through this circumstance, that it is
the will of the Lord they should lay by their rent weekly. I beseech
those brethren who are not pursuing this course, to do so, and they
will soon prove by experience the benefit of acting on Scriptural
principles even as it regards this life.]

Dec. 17. Today eleven brethren and sisters were proposed for
fellowship. The Lord still uses us as instruments. Truly, our labour
in the Lord is not in vain!

Dec. 20. As the expenses for the Orphans have been above 47l. within
the last six days, and as but little above 13l. has come in, and as
the money for printing the Report had to be kept back, in order that
we might not be in debt, we were again today very low in funds,
though it is but six days since the public meetings. As I knew that
tomorrow several pounds would be needed to supply the matrons, I gave
myself this morning to prayer. About a quarter of an hour afterwards
I received 3l., the payment of a legacy, left by a sister, who fell
asleep in Jesus several months since, in Ireland. Besides this I
received from the brother, through whom the legacy was paid, 2l. 10s.
for the Orphan-Fund. With this 5l. 10s. I hope to be able to meet the
expenses of tomorrow.

I observe here that it might have been naturally supposed that every
heart would be touched, through what was publicly stated about the
remarkable manner in which the Lord had provided for us for nearly
150 days, and that consequently an abundance of means would have come
in. To this is to be added, that 50l. 5s. 3d. was in hand on Dec. 10,
and that therefore it seemed not likely that we should be in need;
and yet, by Dec. 20, we were again so poor, that there was nothing to
meet the expenses of the next day, as has just been related. All this
came not unawares upon me and my fellow-labourers; for we had been
taught to look off from all creature expectations to the living God.
It was on this account that, many times in our prayer meetings during
November and the beginning of December, we were led to ask the Lord,
not to allow us to expect an influx of means because, for the benefit
of the Church, our circumstances would be made known at the public
meetings. And how kind was it of the Lord to give us prayer about
this, and thus to prepare us beforehand; for had we leaned upon
natural expectations, we should have been surely disappointed, as
only six days after the meetings we were as poor as ever. By the
grace of God we are so acquainted with the heart of our Father, that
we speak not about these things to excite the compassion of our
fellow saints, for we have learned to lean upon God only; but we make
known His dealings with us, that others may be led "to taste and see
that the Lord is good," and to put their trust in Him.

The sister who left the 3l. for the Orphans, as just alluded to, also
left 3l. for the funds of the other objects, 20l. to be divided
between brother Craik and me, and 3l. for the poor saints.

Dec. 22. A solemn day. I received today the information from my
father that my brother died on October 7th. When I saw him in April
this year, he was living in open sin, and in disunion with my father.
I cannot learn that his end was different from his life, so that I
have no comfort in his death.--Of all the trials that can befall a
believer, the death of an unconverted near relative seems to me one
of the greatest. "Shall not the judge of all the earth do right?"
must be the stay of the believer at such a time, and, by grace, it is
my stay now. I know that the Lord is glorified in my brother,
whatever his end has been: whether in his last hours, like the thief,
on the cross, he was saved, or whether he died in sin and unbelief;
yet I do, as to myself, desire from my heart to adore that grace
which plucked me as a brand out of the burning, many years ago.--May
the Lord make this event a lasting blessing to me, especially in
leading me to earnestness in prayer for my father!

Dec. 26. From the 21st to this day several small donations had come
in for the Orphans, so that we were supplied as we needed. Today
there was ten-pence left, after the dayâ€™s expenses had been met. One
hour after the Lord kindly appeared again. 5l. was sent by Q. Q. This
money came, just after I had prayed for means.

Dec. 27. Today came in 2l. 12s. 6d., whereby the Lord has again
helped us to meet the probable expenses of tomorrow.

Dec. 28. This evening the Lord kindly sent further help, when we were
again destitute of the means of providing for tomorrow. I received
20l. (half for the Orphan-Fund, and half for the other funds), with
Ecclesiastes ix. 10: "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with
thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest."

Dec. 29. A sister, having felt herself particularly stirred up about
the Orphans, as she writes, sent this evening 7l. five pounds from
herself, and 2l. which had been sent from the EAST INDIES. To the
Lord this is to be ascribed, who, in answer to our prayers, makes
these impressions on the hearts of His children.



REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1838.



1. As to the church.

68 brethren and sisters we found in fellowship, when brother Craik
and I came to Bristol.

458 have been admitted into fellowship since, so that the total
number would be

526 had there been no changes. But,

31 have fallen asleep.

28 are under church discipline, which is the total number of all the
cases of separation from communion within these six years and seven
months.

36 have left Bristol

26 have left us, but are still in Bristol. Only 26 within six years
and seven months!

Total 121. There are therefore only 405 at present in fellowship with
us. 61 have been added during the last year, of whom 36 have been
brought among us to the knowledge of the truth.

II. As to my temporal supplies

The Lord has been pleased to give me during the past year:

1. By the Freewill Offerings through the boxes Â£151 6s. 8d.

2. By presents in money from believers in and out of Bristol Â£141
18s. 0d.

3. By money, through family connexion Â£40 0s. 0d.

4. By presents in clothes, provisions, etc., which were worth to me,
at least Â£12 0s. 0d.

We have been living for six months, half free of rent whereby we have
saved at least Â£5 0s. 0d.

Altogether Â£350 4s. 8d.



During no period of my life had I such need of means, on account of
my own long illness and that of my dear wife, and on account ofâ€™ the
many and particular calls for means as during the past year; but also
during no period of my life has the Lord so richly supplied me.
Truly, it must be manifest to all that I have served a most kind
Master, during this year also, and that, even for this life, it is by
far the best thing to seek to act according to the mind of the Lord,
as to temporal things.

January 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, 1830. We have had three especial church
prayer meetings these three days. The year commenced with mercies. In
the first hour of the year there came in for the Orphans 2l. 7s.,
which was given after our usual prayer meeting on December 31, which
this time lasted from seven in the evening till after midnight.

Jan. 11. Since December 20, came in several donations for the
Orphans, so that we were supplied, before that which we had in hand
was quite gone. On the seventh, however, all our money was again
expended, when a brother, from the neighbourhood of London, who, is
staying here, gave me 10l. Today, when this 10l. was given out, I
received from London 3l. 7s., and 4s. besides. Thus the Lord, as our
need is, sends help, and all in answer to prayer, without our asking
any one.

Jan. 17. Since the 11th 22 small donations have again come in, by
which we have been helped thus far. This afternoon all which was in
hand was given for housekeeping, and I was again penniless. The Lord,
however, was mindful of this, and in the evening two sovereigns were
left anonymously at my house. In the paper was written: "The enclosed
are for the use of the Orphan-Houses, from J. H., who thinks he ought
to do something for the Institution." J. H. will have in this a proof
that the Lord touched his heart to give the money, because there was
not a penny in hand for those who are the especial care of Him who is
the "Father of the fatherless."

Jan. 20. Ten small donations have come in since the 17th, which have
enabled us to provide what was needed for the last three days, and
also for today.--For some time past it has appeared to me that the
words "Ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye
may do them good," which the Lord spoke to His disciples, who were
themselves very poor, imply that the children of God, as such, have
power with God to bring temporal blessings upon poor saints or poor
unbelievers, through the instrumentality of prayer. Accordingly I
have been led to ask the Lord for means to assist poor saints; and at
different times He has stirred up His children to intrust me with
sums both large and small, for that especial object; or has, by some
means or other, put money at my disposal, which I might so use. In
like manner I had been asking again for means a few days since, to be
able more extensively to assist the poor saints in communion with us,
as just now many of them are not merely tried by the usual temporal
difficulties arising from its being winter, but especially from the
high price of bread. And now this evening the Lord has given me the
answer to my prayer. When I came home from the meeting, I found a
brother at my house who offered to give me 10l. a week, for twelve
weeks, towards providing the poor saints with coals and needful
articles of clothing, but chiefly with bread. [Accordingly this
brother sent me two days afterwards 120l.,--whereby very many,
especially poor widows, were greatly assisted, chiefly with flour and
bread. This money just lasted till the price of bread was reduced
from 9 1/2d. to 7 1/2d. Thus, for several weeks, about 150 quarterns
of bread were distributed weekly, besides what was given in flour,
coals, and clothes. I have mentioned this circumstance as an
encouragement to those who either have little or nothing at all to
give to poor persons, and who yet have a desire to give; and to those
who have means, but whose means are not adequate to relieve all the
demands made upon them. Had we more grace to plead the words of our
Lord, above referred to, we should receive far more from Him to meet
the necessities around us.]

Jan. 22. A brother formerly an officer in the navy, Who for Jesusâ€™
sake has given up his rank and pay, gave three silver table spoons,
three silver forks, and two teaspoons, to be sold for the benefit of
the Orphans. The produce of them, with 1l. 5s. which has come in
besides, enabled us to meet the expenses of today and tomorrow.

Jan. 26. Saturday. The need of the 24th, 25th, and of today was
supplied, partly, by the little that had been left on the 23rd; and
partly, by five small donations, by 9s. for the childrenâ€™s
needlework, and by 12s. which had come in by the sale of two old silk
dresses, which had been given for sale. Now, when we were again
penniless, 6s. was given me, just after I had been praying for means.

Jan. 28. Monday morning. We are now quite reduced as to means for the
Orphans. The little which is in hand has been put by for rent. How
the Lord will help us through this day, I know not; but I have faith
in God. He will help us, though I know not how. By Godâ€™s help I
purpose not to take a single penny of what is in hand, because it is
due for rent.--This morning and afternoon came in from one individual
4s. 6d., and from a sister, who earns her bread by needlework, 1l.
There was also 1l. 0s. 10d. taken out of the boxes in the
Orphan-Houses, which our need had led us to open. Thus we were helped
through the day, and have 1l. left for tomorrow.

Jan. 29. The 1l. which was left helped us through this day; but in
the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House were no means to take in bread. In the evening
eight small loaves were sent by a sister who could not possibly know
our need, and thus we were supplied.

Jan, 30. A little while after I had been in prayer this morning for
means for the Orphans, brother T. brought a silver watch and 5s.,
which had been given last evening. Also, still further, came in this
morning five yards of Indian muslin, a zephyr scarf, a muslin dress,
and a gold locket, to be sold. About two hours afterwards was sent 1l.

The individual who last evening gave the silver watch and 5s. for the
Orphans, called on me today. She is a servant, who in the house of
her master found the first part of this Narrative soon after the
publication of the first edition, which the Lord used as the means of
her conversion. [She fell asleep in Jesus, after having been 36 years
in fellowship with us.]

Jan. 31. There came in this morning 2s. 6d. for the Orphans. This,
with 1l. in hand, and 10s. which one of the labourers contributed,
was sufficient for this dayâ€™s necessities.

Feb. 1. There is no money in hand for the Orphans. I am waiting on
God. Just when Brother T. had come to tell me that the need for this
day would be 19s. 6d., one of the labourers in the work came and gave
me 1l.

Feb. 2. There are again no means in hand. One of the labourers gave
1l., but I know not whether 1l. will be sufficient for the
necessities of this day. This I do know, however, that the Lord will
supply us with more, should more be needed. When I met with the
brethren and sisters for prayer, one of the labourers gave his watch,
under the condition that 1l., which was needed besides that which we
had in hand, should be taken from the rent money which had been put
by, till it could be replaced; and, if otherwise, that the watch
should be sold at the end of the quarter. Just as we had separated, a
sovereign was brought to me, which had been sent to my house since I
had left it. This was taken instead of the one which had been
advanced upon the watch, and thus a speedy answer was granted to our
prayers. We have now been brought to the close of one more week.

Feb. 3. Lordâ€™s day. A sister sent from her sick bed this evening 2l.
for the Orphans, with Ecclesiastes ix. 10. Thus the Lord has supplied
our need for tomorrow.

Feb. 4. This afternoon came in two pounds more from the grandmother
of two of the Orphans, in answer to prayer, and very seasonably, as
the coals in one house are quite out, and nearly so in the other two.

Feb. 5. Today came in 12s., which supplied the necessities of this
day.

Feb. 6. Only 10s. 6d. was needed for today, which one of the
labourers gave.

Feb. 7. This day has been one of the most remarkable days as it
regards the Funds. There was no money in hand, I was waiting upon
God. I had asked him repeatedly, but no supplies came. Brother T.
called between 11 and 12 oâ€™clock, to tell me that about 1l. 2s. would
be needed, to take in bread for the three houses, and to meet the
other expenses; but we had only 2s. 9d., which yesterday had been
taken out of the boxes in the Orphan-Houses. He went to Clifton to
make arrangements for the reception of the three orphans of our
sister Loader, who fell asleep on the 4th; for though we have no
funds in hand, the work goes on, and our confidence is not
diminished. I therefore requested him to call on his way back from
Clifton, to see whether the Lord might have sent any money in the
mean time. When he came I had received nothing, but one of the
labourers, having 5s. of his own, gave it. It was now four oâ€™clock. I
knew not how the sisters had got through the day. Just before I went
out to preach, 5s. was brought to my house, which I took as a token
for good. I had been asking the Lord for a passage of the Word to
speak from this evening, and at last was directed to Matt. vi. 19-34,
a subject most applicable to our circumstances. After the meeting was
over, I went to the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, to meet with the brethren
for prayer, and to give the 5s. which I had received, and to see what
could be done. When I arrived there, I found that a box had come for
me from Barnstaple. The carriage was paid, else there would have been
no money to pay for it. (See how the Lordâ€™s hand is in the smallest
matters!) The box was opened, and it contained, in a letter from a
sister, 10l., of which 8l. was for the Orphans, and 2l. for the Bible
Fund; from brethren at Barnstaple, 2l. 11s. 2d.; and from another
brother 5s. Besides this, there were in the box 4 yards of merino, 3
pairs of new shoes, 2 pairs of new socks: also six books for sale.
Likewise a gold pencil-case, 2 gold rings, 2 gold drops of ear-rings,
a necklace, and a silver pencil-case. On inquiry, how the sisters had
been carried through the day, I found it thus: everything was in the
houses which was needed for dinner. After dinner a lady from
Thornbury came and bought one of my Narratives and one of the
Reports, and gave 3s. besides. About five minutes afterwards the
baker came to the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House. The matron of the
Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House seeing him, went immediately with the 6s. 6d.
which she had just received, (to prevent his being sent away, as
there was no money in hand at the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House,) and bought
bread to the amount of 4s. 6d. The two remaining shillings, with the
little which was in hand, served to buy bread for the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House.
By the donations sent in the box, I was enabled to give a rich supply
to the matrons before the close of the day.

How sweet to see our Father thus caring for us! To a person who has
spiritual eyes, what a proof is one such day of the most particular
providence of God! And we have had many such days.

Feb. 8. Today the Lord sent still further help, which is remarkable
for two reasons in particular. First, we had decided yesterday upon
receiving the three little Loaders, though we were so low as to
funds. Thus the Lord sent means on their behalf. Secondly, we were
brought so low yesterday, and our faith was so much tried, in order
that now again the abundance of supplies out of our loving Fatherâ€™s
hand, might be so much the sweeter. A sister in the neighbourhood of
London sent today in money 1l. 5s., and the following articles for
sale; 3 purses, 1 mourning brooch, 1 amber ditto, 1 amethyst stud, 1
cameo ditto, I pair of coral ear rings, 1 coral cross, 1 ring set
with a diamond and six rubies, 1 ditto pearl and garnet, 1 ditto
garnet, 1 ruby cross, 4 necklaces, and 148 pamphlets and tracts. Also
several articles of clothing for the children.

Feb. 13. Since the 8th, five donations, amounting to 9l. 9s., had
come in. This afternoon I paid out the last money which we had in
hand, and in giving it to brother T. said, we have now again to look
to the Lord for further supplies. This evening 5l. was given to me,
which had come in under the folio wing circumstances:--

A gentleman and lady visited the Orphan-Houses, and met at the
Boysâ€™-Orphan-House two ladies who were likewise visiting. One of the
ladies said to the matron of the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House: "Of course, you
cannot carry on these institutions without a good stock of funds."
The gentleman, turning to the matron, said, "Have you a good stock?"
She replied: "Our funds are deposited in a bank which cannot break."
The tears came into the eyes of the inquiring lady. The gentleman, on
leaving, gave to the master of the boys 5l., which came in when I had
not a penny in hand.

Feb. 16. Yesterday came in 17s. 6d. for the Orphans, which, with what
was taken out of the boxes today, helped us through; and thus we have
been brought to the close of one more week.

March 5. Up to this day, since Feb. 16, the supplies for the Orphans
have come in so seasonably, that we were able comfortably to meet all
the demands. Today, however, I knew that there would be again several
pounds required, as, besides the daily provisions, there were coals
needed, the treacle-casks in two houses were empty, and there was but
5s. in hand. I gave myself therefore to prayer this morning. WHILST I
WAS IN PRAYER, Q. Q. sent a cheque for 7l. 10s. Thus the Lord has
again most seasonably helped us out of our difficulty. There came in
still further this day, 1l. 19s. 2d., by the sale of some articles,
which had been given for the benefit of the Orphans.

March 6. For some time past the minds of several brethren among us,
as well as that of brother Craik and my own, had been much exercised
respecting certain questions connected with points of church order
and discipline, on account of which brother Craik and I were absent
from Bristol during the last two weeks, to give ourselves to prayer
and consideration respecting those points. Since our return we have
had, these last three evenings, meetings with the saints, before whom
we stated the result to which we had been led, after prayer and
examination of the Scriptures. The following is an abstract of what
was stated at those meetings, which I give here, as this matter forms
an important period in my experience about church matters; but the
abstract will be of little use, except the reader consider carefully
the passages to which reference is made.



I.--QUESTIONS RESPECTING THE ELDERSHIP.



(1) How does it appear to be the mind of God, that, in every Church,
there should be recognized Elders?

Ans. From the following passages compared together, Matth. xxiv. 45,
Luke xii. 42. From these passages we learn that some are set by the
Lord Himself in the office of Rulers and Teachers, and that this
office (in spite of the fallen state of the Church) should be in
being even down to the close of the present dispensation.
Accordingly, we find from Acts xiv. 23, xx. 17, Tit. i. 5, and 1 Pet.
v. 1, that soon after the saints had been converted, and had
associated together in a Church character, Elders were appointed to
take the rule over them and to fulfil the office of under-shepherds.

This must not be understood as implying, that, when believers are
associated in Church fellowship, they ought to elect Elders according
to their own will, whether the Lord may have qualified persons or
not; but rather that such should wait upon God, that He Himself would
be pleased to raise up such as may be qualified for teaching and
ruling in His church.

(2) How do such come into office?

Ans. By the appointment of the Holy Ghost, Acts xx. 28.

(3) How may this appointment be made known to the individuals called
to the office, and to those amongst whom they may be called to labour?

Ans. By the secret call of the Spirit, 1 Tim. iii. 1, confirmed by
the possession of the requisite qualifications, 1 Tim. iii. 2-7, Tit.
i. 6-9, and by the Lordâ€™s blessing resting upon their labours, 1 Cor.
ix. 2.

In 1 Cor. ix. 2, Paul condescends to the weakness of some, who were
in danger of being led away by those factious persons who questioned
his authority. As an Apostleâ€”appointed by the express word of the
Lord--he needed not such outward confirmation. But if he used his
success as an argument in confirmation of his call, how much more may
ordinary servants of the Lord Jesus employ such an argument, seeing
that the way, in which they are called for the work, is such as to
require some outward confirmation.

(4) Is it incumbent upon the saints to acknowledge such and to submit
to them in the Lord?

Ans. Yes. See 1 Cor. xvi. 15, 16, 1 Thess. v. 12, 13, Heb. xiii. 7,
17, and 1 Tim. v. 17. In these passages obedience to pastoral
authority is clearly enjoined.

II.--Ought matters of discipline to be finally settled by the Elders
in private, or in the presence of the Church, and as the act of the
whole body?

Ans. (1) Such matters are to be finally settled in the presence of
the Church. This appears from Matth. xviii. 17, 1 Cor. v. 4, 5, 2
Cor. ii. 6-8, 1 Tim. v. 20. (2) Such matters are to be finally
settled as the act of the whole body, Matth. xviii. 17, 18. In this
passage the act of exclusion is spoken of as the act of the whole
body. 1 Cor. v. 4, 5, 7, 12, 13. In this passage Paul gives the
direction, respecting the exercise of discipline, in such a way as to
render the whole body responsible: verse 7, "Purge out the old
leaven, that ye maybe a new lump;" and verse 13, "Therefore put away
from among yourselves that wicked person." From 2 Cor. ii. 6-8, we
learn that the act of exclusion was not the act of the Elders only,
but of the Church. "Sufficient to such a man is this punishment
(rather, public censure) which was inflicted of many." From verse 8
we learn that the act of restoration was to be a public act of the
brethren: "Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm (rather
ratify by a public act) your love towards him."

As to the reception of brethren into fellowship, this is an act of
simple obedience to the Lord, both on the part of the Elders and the
whole Church. We are bound and privileged to receive all those who
make a credible profession of faith in Christ, according to that
Scripture, "Receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to
the glory of God." Rom. xv. 7.

III.--When should Church acts (such as acts of reception, restoration,
exclusion, &c.) be attended to?

Ans. It cannot be expressly proved from Scripture, whether such acts
were attended to at the meeting for the breaking of bread, or at any
other meeting; therefore this is a point on which, if different
churches differ, mutual forbearance ought to be exercised. The way in
which such matters have hitherto been managed amongst us has been by
the Church coming together on a week-evening. Before we came to
Bristol we had been accustomed to this mode, and, finding nothing in
Scripture against it, we continued the practice. But, after prayer,
and more careful consideration of this point, it has appeared well to
us that such acts should be attended to on the Lordâ€™s days, when the
saints meet together for the breaking of bread. We have been induced
to make this alteration by the following reasons:--

(1) This latter mode prevents matters from being delayed. There not
being a sufficiency of matter for a meeting on purpose every week, it
has sometimes happened, that, what would better have been stated to
the Church at once, has been kept back from the body for some weeks.
Now, it is important that what concerns the whole Church, should be
made known as soon as possible to those who are in fellowship, that
they may act accordingly. Delay, moreover, seems inconsistent with
the pilgrim-character of the people of God.

(2) More believers can be present on the Lordâ€™s days than can attend
on week evenings. The importance of this reason will appear from
considering how everything which concerns the Church should be known
to as many as possible. For how can the saints pray for those who may
have to be excluded,--how can they sympathize in cases of peculiar
trial,--and how can they rejoice and give thanks on account of those
who may be received or restored, unless they are made acquainted with
the facts connected with such cases?

(3) A testimony is thus given that all who break bread are Church
members. By attending to Church acts in the meeting for breaking of
bread, we show that we make no difference between receiving into
fellowship at the Lordâ€™s supper, and into Church membership; but that
the individual who is admitted to the Lordâ€™s table is therewith also
received to all the privileges, trials, and responsibilities of
Church membership.

(4) There is a peculiar propriety in acts of reception, restoration
and exclusion being attended to when the saints meet together for the
breaking of bread, as, in that ordinance especially, we show forth
our fellowship with each other.

Objections answered.

(1) This alteration has the appearance of changeableness.

Reply. Such an objection would apply to any case in which increased
light led to any improvement, and is, therefore, not to be regarded.
It would be an evil thing if there were any change respecting the
foundation truths of the Gospel; but the point in question is only a
matter of Church order.

(2) More time may thus be required than it would be well to give to
such a purpose on the Lordâ€™s day.

Reply. As, according to this plan, Church business will be attended
to every Lordâ€™s day, it is more than probable that the meetings will
be thereby prolonged for a few minutes only; but should circumstance
required it, a special meeting may still be appointed during the
week, for all who break bread with us. This, however, would only be
needful, provided the matters to be brought before the brethren were
to require more time than could be given to them at the breaking of
bread.

N.B. (1) Should any persons be present who do not break bread with
us, they may be requested to withdraw, whenever such points require
to be stated, as it would not be well to speak of in the presence of
unbelievers.

(2) As there are two places in which the saints meet for the breaking
of bread, the matters connected with Church acts must be brought out
at each place.



IV.--QUESTIONS RELATIVE TO THE LORDâ€™S SUPPER.



(1) How frequently ought the breaking of bread to be attended to?

Ans. Although we have no express command respecting the frequency of
its observance, yet the example of the apostles and of the first
disciples would lead us to observe this ordinance every Lordâ€™s day.
Acts xx. 7.

(2) What ought to be the character of the meeting at which the saints
are assembled for the breaking of bread?

Ans. As in this ordinance we show forth our common participation in
all the benefits of our Lordâ€™s death, and our union to Him and to
each other (1 Cor. x. 16, 17,) opportunity ought to be given for the
exercise of the gifts of teaching or exhortation, and communion in
prayer and praise. Rom. xii. 4â€”8, Eph. iv. 11â€”16. The manifestation
of our common participation in each otherâ€™s gifts cannot be fully
given at such meetings, if the whole meeting is, necessarily,
conducted by one individual. This mode of meeting does not however
take off from those, who have the gifts of teaching or exhortation,
the responsibility of edifying the church, as opportunity may be
offered.

(3) Is it desirable that the bread should be broken at the Lordâ€™s
Supper by one of the Elders, or should each individual of the body
break it for himself?

Ans. Neither way can be so decidedly proved from Scripture, that we
are warranted in objecting to the other as positively unscriptural,
yet--

(1) The letter of Scripture seems rather in favour of its being done
by each brother and sister, 1 Cor. x. 16, 17. "The bread which we
break."

(2) Its being done by each of the disciples, is more fitted to
express that we all, by our sins, have broken the body of our Lord.

(3) By attending to the ordinance in this way, we manifest our
freedom from the common error that the Lordâ€™s supper must be
administered by some particular individual, possessed of what is
called a ministerial character, instead of being an act of social
worship and obedience.

[Before brother Craik and I left Bristol for the consideration of the
above points, things wore a gloomy appearance. A separation in the
church seemed to be unavoidable. But God had mercy, and pitied us. He
was pleased to give us not merely increased light, but showed us also
how to act, and gave us a measure of wisdom, grace and spiritual
courage for acting. The clouds were dispelled, and peace was restored
in the church.]

While I was away from Bristol, Samuel Loader, a little orphan boy,
died, after a fortnightâ€™s residence in the house, and only three
weeks after his motherâ€™s death. The brethren in the Boys-Orphan-House
consider him to have died in the faith.

March 16. Saturday. By the good hand of the Lord we are brought to
the close of one more week. I have been able to meet all the current
expenses for the Orphans, and to pay, besides this, 10l. for
salaries. Thus a part of what has been due for several weeks to my
dear fellow-labourers is defrayed. I have especially prayed within
the last ten days that the Lord would be pleased to give me the means
for this. 2s. 8 1/2d. I have left.

March 18. Monday. Last evening 5l. came in with Eccles. ix. 10. Thus
we were again enabled to supply all the necessities of this day.

Pause a few moments, dear reader! Consider how seasonably the Lord
sends the supplies! Not once does He forget us! Not once is our need
only half supplied! Not once do His supplies come too late! Dear
reader, if you have not the like experience of the Lordâ€™s watchful
care, Oh taste and see that the Lord is good!

March 20. The need of the 18th and 19th was supplied by the 5l. which
had come in on the 18th. Today we were again poor and needy,
therefore the Lord thought on us, and sent us 3l. l6s. 1 1/2d.

March 22. Some trinkets which had been given, and 12s. which was in
hand, supplied the need of today. Yesterday were sent six sacks of
potatoes. We were not able to lay in a stock last autumn (as we had
done the two previous autumns) on account of want of means, but in no
previous year have we had so many sent.

March 23. Today I received a letter from brother T., who is on
account of his health in Devonshire, to inform me that a heavy gold
chain, a ring set with ten brilliants, a pair of gold bracelets, and
2l. have been given to him. He gave a Report to a brother, who,
having read it, was thereby stirred up to prayer, and knowing that
his believing sister possessed these trinkets, he asked the Lord to
incline her heart to give them up for the benefit of our Orphans,
which she soon after did. By means of these donations I am able both
to meet the remaining expenses of this week, and also to pay 15l.,
which still remains due on account of the salaries. My fellow-labourers
not only never ask me for any thing, but are willing to part with money,
or any thing else in the hour of need; nevertheless, I had asked the Lord
about this point frequently, and He has now given me my request, whereof
I am glad. I received also this afternoon 5l. 10s., besides a number of
things to be disposed of for the Orphans.

March 24. The Lord has again kindly opened His liberal hand today,
and given us 6l. 10s. Thus we have wherewith to meet the necessities
of tomorrow in the Orphan-Houses.

From March 24 to April 7, came in about sixty small donations. This,
with the produce of the sale of the trinkets, supplied all our need
for the Orphans.

April 7. Our funds were now again spent, except 15s., though three
days ago above 30l. had come in; therefore the Lord has sent in again
this day several contributions, altogether 6l. 5s.

April 8. The money which came in yesterday was sent off today for
housekeeping in the three different houses, and when I was now again
left penniless, there came in 2l. 6s. 10d.

April 9. The 2l. 6s. 10d. was given out today for housekeeping, and I
am once more penniless.--A few hours after I had written this, there
was given to me by a brother 2l. 10s. When I received this money, I
was at the same time informed of the death of one of our sisters, a
widow, whose child we can receive.

April 10. Today was sent anonymously from the country 5l. In the
evening I received still further 1l. l6s. 6d.

April 11. It is three years today since the first Orphans were
received. Good indeed has the Lord been to us during these three
years! We have lacked nothing! Again He has sent this day, in a
remarkable manner, 5l., with the following letter, addressed to a
brother:

"My dear Friend, enclosed are 5l. for the Orphan-Asylum, the history
of which is rather interesting. We have a servant who lived some
years ago as kitchen-maid in a noble family (i. e. the master a
wealthy member of Parliament, the mistress an Earlâ€™s daughter.) No
perquisites were allowed; but the individual in question acted on the
same principle as her fellow-servants, and sold kitchen-stuff for her
own benefit, which she thinks might amount to 4l.; and therefore she
believes that 5l. would fully repay principal and interest. This
money is of course due to her former master and mistress, with whom I
have had several interviews on the subject. They were disposed that
the money should be given to some charity; and in consequence of
reading one of the Reports you kindly sent me, the young woman had a
great desire that her own repentance might yield fruit to that work
of faith and love. Her wishes have been sanctioned by her former
mistress. It is rather remarkable that our truly Christian servant
had been converted a year and a half, before this individual sin,
calling for pecuniary restitution, had come into her remembrance."

April 13. I conversed with another of the Orphans, who seems to have
been truly converted, and who has walked consistently for many
months. Tomorrow she will be united with the saints in communion. She
will be the third in fellowship with us, and several have died in the
faith. How has the Lord owned the work, even in this respect!

April 14. Today 5l. 0s. 8d. came in for the Orphans, 1l. of which is
one of the most remarkable gifts that we have ever had. A poor
brother, with a large family, and small wages (there are eight in the
family, and he had 15s. wages till lately, when they were raised to
18s.) put by this money by little and little of what was given him by
his master for beer. This brother, who was converted about five years
ago, was before that time a notorious drunkard.

April 30. Today our dear young brother, John Short, only a little
more than 14 years old, fell asleep, after having been for several
years ill. He had been for several years converted. He was one of our
Sunday-School children before his illness. When, many months since,
he lost one of his limbs by amputation, he glorified the Lord not
merely by the way in which he sustained the severe suffering
attending the operation, but also by confessing the Lord, as his
strength, in the hour of trial. He was a sweet youth!

July 2. Today was given me, when there was not one shilling in hand,
50l. for the Schoolâ€”Bibleâ€”and Missionary-Fund.

July 15. Monday. Today 2l. 7s. 3d. was needed for the Orphans, but we
had nothing. How to obtain the means for a dinner, and for what else
was needed, I knew not. My heart was perfectly at peace, and
unusually sure of help, though I knew not in the least whence it was
to come. Before brother T. came, I received a letter from India,
written in May, with an order for 50l. for the Orphans. I had said
last Saturday to brother T., that it would be desirable to have 50l.,
as the salaries of all my fellow-labourers are due, the three
treacle-casks empty, all the provision stores exhausted, several
articles of clothing needed, and worsted for the boys to go on with
their knitting. Now the Lord has sent exactly 50l. Moreover this
money comes very seasonably, as in three days I shall have to leave
Bristol for some days, and can now go comfortably, as it regards
leaving means behind.

[In the afternoon of this same day I met at a brotherâ€™s house with
several believers, when a sister said that she had often thought
about the care and burden I must have on my mind, as it regards
obtaining the necessary supplies for so many persons. As this may not
be a solitary instance, I would state, that, by the grace of God,
this is no cause of anxiety to me. The children I have years ago cast
upon the Lord. The whole work is His, and it becomes me to be without
carefulness. In whatever points I am lacking, in this point I am
able, by the grace of God, to roll the burden upon my heavenly
Father. Though now (July 1845) for about seven years our funds have
been so exhausted, that it has been comparatively a rare case that
there have been means in hand to meet the necessities of the Orphans
for three days together; yet have I been only once tried in spirit,
and that was on Sept. 18, 1838, when for the first time the Lord
seemed not to regard our prayer. But when He did send help at that
time, and I saw that it was only for the trial of our faith, and not
because He had forsaken the work that we were brought so low, my soul
was so strengthened and encouraged, that I have not only not been
allowed to distrust the Lord since that time, but I have not even
been cast down when in the deepest poverty. Nevertheless, in this
respect also am I now, as much as ever, dependant on the Lord; and I
earnestly beseech for myself and my fellow-labourers the prayers of
all those, to whom the glory of God is dear. How great would be the
dishonour to the name of God, if we, who have so publicly made our
boast in Him, should so fall as to act in these very points as the
world does! Help us then, brethren, with your prayers, that we may
trust in God to the end. We can expect nothing but that our faith
will yet be tried, and it may be more than ever; and we shall fall,
if the Lord does not uphold us.]

July 16 and 17. These two days we have had two especial prayer
meetings, to commend to the Lord five German brethren who for some
weeks have been sojourning among us, and who purpose to leave
tomorrow for Liverpool, to sail from thence to the East Indies.

July 18. I left this morning with the German brethren, to accompany
them to Liverpool.

July 21. Liverpool. This afternoon I preached in the open air on the
docks. Truly, it must be a sweet privilege to be permitted frequently
to proclaim the glad tidings of the Gospel in the open air, which the
Lord does not bestow upon me, as, under ordinary circumstances, I
have no strength for this work.--The people were attentive. There was
but one who mocked.

July 22. Preached again out of doors.

July 23. I accompanied the five brethren on board this afternoon.

July 27. Today I had another remarkable proof of the importance of
the children of God opening their hearts to each other, especially
when they are getting into a cold state, or are under the power of a
certain sin, or are in especial difficulty. An individual called on
me, who I trust is a brother, with whom I had conversed once before,
but felt uncomfortable respecting him. When he called again today, it
appeared to me that there was something upon his heart, which, if I
could but know, I might be instrumental in benefiting him. I pressed
him affectionately to open his heart, assuring him at the same time
that the matter which he might speak of should remain in my own
bosom. At last I succeeded. [The result of this conversation was,
that the advice which I gave him, led him, after three days, to leave
for America, where he ought to have been, instead of being in
England; and if he has followed my advice, in one other point, the
matter which for years had burdened his conscience, and which, no
doubt had been the means of keeping him in a low spiritual state,
will have no more power over him. Should this fall into the hands of
any children of God who have a particular trial or burden, or a
guilty conscience, on account of a particular thing, or a besetting
sin, etc., on account of which it would be beneficial to open their
hearts to another child of God, in whose love, spiritual judgment,
etc., they have confidence, I would advise them to do so. I know from
my own experience, how often the snare of the devil has been broken,
when under the power of sin; how often the heart has been comforted,
when nigh to be overwhelmed; how often advice, under great
perplexity, has been obtained,--by opening my heart to a brother in
whom I had confidence. We are children of the same family, and ought
therefore to be helpers one of another.]

Aug. 3. Â£3. 5s. was required to meet the necessities of the
Orphan-Houses this day. The Lord enabled us to meet this demand,
partly, by the sale of some Indian muslin, which had been given some
months since, but which was only now disposed of; partly, by a few
small donations; and partly, by what one of the labourers added of
his own. [We have often found that the money for articles, which were
put out to be sold, has come in most seasonably. At this time it
happened so that a brother, into whose hands the muslin had been put,
felt himself stirred up to go and ask the individual who had it for
sale whether she had disposed of it. This brother knew nothing about
our need at that time.]

Aug. 5. Monday. On Saturday and yesterday morning I had repeatedly
asked the Lord to send us help, as there was not a penny in hand for
the need of today. Yesterday morning a brother gave me two
sovereigns, and in the evening I received two more. Besides this,
there was 4l. 10s. anonymously given for three weeksâ€™ rent for the
Orphan-Houses, also 10s. by a brother, and 9s. came in for needlework
of the children; so that altogether 9l. 9s. came in yesterday.

This evening I took tea with a sister who purposes to leave Bristol
tomorrow for Van Diemenâ€™s Land. [For the comfort of any saints, who
may be similarly situated, I mention the following circumstance. The
son of this sister was transported many years since. In the course of
time he obtained a business of his own in Van Diemenâ€™s Land, and
wished his mother to come to him. The mother went, and had, in answer
to the prayers of the saints, a prosperous voyage. When she arrived,
she found her son truly converted. What a joy for the long and deeply
afflicted mother! What remarkable means the Lord uses to bestow
blessings! Moreover, to mark that the Lord had sent her to her son,
she found that a month before her arrival his wife had died, and that
she therefore reached him just at the right time, both on account of
his children and his business.]

Aug. 7. Today again about 3l. was needed for housekeeping at the
Orphan-Houses, which the Lord had sent in since the day before
yesterday, so that we were able to meet all the demands.

Aug. 8. Today 1l. 3s. was needed, but only 3s. had come in. The
deficiency was supplied by one of the labourers giving a sovereign of
his own. Though there is no money in hand, yet are we so little
discouraged, that we have received today one orphan boy, and have
given notice for the admission of six other children, which will
bring the number up to 98 altogether.

Aug. 9. Only 10s. had come in since yesterday, and as 30s. were
needed, one of the labourers gave a sovereign.

Aug. 10. Saturday. The need of today is 2l. 10s. but only 10s, has
been given since yesterday. One of the labourers, having 2l., gave
it, and thus our need was supplied.

Aug. 12. Monday. The Lord has again kindly sent 11l. Of this sum 10l.
came in from Q. Q., when again there was not one penny in hand. We
have now supplies for about four days.

Aug. 14. Today was very seasonably sent a whole piece of calico and a
piece of print.

Aug. 16. All our money is now again gone. Today 1l. 3s. was needed,
but only 3s. was in hand. One of the labourers was able to add a
sovereign, and thus we were helped.

Aug. 17. Saturday. 5l. was needed today, but only 7s. 6d. had come
in. The remaining 2l. l2s. 6d. one of the labourers gave. Thus we
were helped to the close of another week.

Aug. 19. Monday. This has been again a day in which our faith has
been particularly tried; but even this day we have not been
confounded. Not one penny was in hand when the day began. We had
therefore now, for more than one hundred persons, again to look to
the Lord. But this I must say, to the praise of the Lord, my soul was
perfectly at peace. I meant to have gone very early to the
Orphan-Houses to meet with my fellow-labourers for prayer; but, as
one person after the other called upon me, I was kept from it the
whole morning. When brother T. called upon me between 12 and 1
oâ€™clock for money, I had none to give. In the afternoon at four I was
able to meet with the brethren and sisters. When I came to the
Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, I found that one of those children, for the
reception of whom we had given notice, had been brought from Bath,
and with him was sent 1l. 5s. After the meeting was over, one of the
labourers gave 10s. By means of this 1l. 15s. we were able for this
day also to provide every thing needful.

Aug. 20. When we met together this morning for prayer, only one
shilling had come in since yesterday, and 2l. at least was needed to
meet the expenses of this day. After prayer, one of the labourers
gave 10s., and 1s. 1 1/2d. was taken out of one of the boxes. This
12s. 1 1/2d. was divided to meet the momentary need. About an hour
afterwards, 1l. 14s. came in, being the payment, in part, of articles
which had been sold several months since.

Aug. 21. Nothing had come in since yesterday. 13s. would have been
needed to have taken in the usual quantity of bread. After we had
prayed, the same labourer who had contributed yesterday and the day
before, gave today 5s. more. This helped us to buy milk; but in one
of the houses the usual quantity of bread could not be taken in. I
have further to notice respecting this time of trial, that I had
purposed to have gone yesterday to Bath, to meet today and tomorrow
with several brethren, who are met there from various parts of the
country, to unite in prayer for the present spiritual necessities of
the church at large. However, on account of our present need in the
Orphan-Houses, I could not go yesterday, as I did not think it right
to let my fellow-labourers bear the trial alone. Today also I have
been kept here, as our poverty is greater than ever. Yet (the Lord be
praised!) neither have the children in the least lacked this day, nor
has my mind been in any degree disturbed. My fellow-labourers also
seem quite in peace. We are waiting for deliverance, and we are sure
that the Lord, in His own time, will send it.

Aug. 22. In my morning walk, when I was reminding the Lord of our
need, I felt assured that He would send help this day. My assurance
sprang from our need; for there seemed no way to get through the day,
without help being sent. After breakfast I considered whether there
was any thing which might be turned into money for the dear children.
Among other things, there came under my hands a number of religious
pamphlets which had been given for the benefit of the Orphans; but
all seemed not nearly enough, to meet the necessities of the day, In
this our deep poverty, after I had gathered together the few things
for sale, a sister, who earns her bread by the labour of her hands,
brought 82l. This sister had seen it to be binding upon believers in
our Lord Jesus to act out His commandments: "Sell that ye have (sell
your possessions) and give alms," Luke xii. 33; and "Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth," Matt. vi. 19. Accordingly she had
drawn her money out of the bank and stocks, being 250l., and had
brought it to me at three different times for the benefit of the
Orphans, the Bibleâ€”Missionaryâ€”and School-Fund, and the poor saints,
About two months ago she brought me 100l. more, being the produce of
some other possession which she had sold, the half of which was to be
used for the Schoolâ€”Bible-and Missionary Fund; and the other half
for the poor saints. This 82l. which she had brought today, is the
produce of the sale of her last earthly possession.--[At the time I am
preparing the seventh edition for the press, more than twenty-nine
years have passed away, and this sister has never expressed the least
regret as to the step she took, but goes on, quietly labouring with
her hands, to earn her bread.]--But even now, when this money was
given, I left it in the hands of the Lord, whether any part of it
should be applied for the Orphans. I asked the sister, therefore,
whether she wished the money to be spent in any particular way, as
she had expressed her wish about the former sums. This time she left
it with me, to lay out the money as I thought best. I took,
therefore, half of it for the Orphans, and half for the other objects
of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. I have thus been enabled to
come to Bath, (after I had sent a more than usual supply to the
matrons), to meet, at least for the remaining time, with the brethren
who are assembled here for prayer. Before the day is over, I have
received 10l. more, while at Bath, from one of the brethren who are
assembled here; so that our deep poverty, in the morning, has been
turned into a comparative abundance.

Aug. 23. The Lord has sent still further supplies. Another of the
brethren gave me this morning 1l., and a third, with whom I drove
back to Bristol, 5l.

From Aug. 25 to Sept. 1, there came in above 17l. more.

Sept. 4. I have been led to pray whether it is the Lordâ€™s will that I
should leave Bristol for a season, as I have for the last fortnight
been suffering from indigestion, by which my whole system is
weakened, and thus the nerves of my head are more than usually
affected. There are, however, two hindrances in the way, want of
means for the Orphans, and want of means for my own personal
expenses.--Today I have received a cheque from Q. Q. for 7l. 10s. for
the Orphans, which came, therefore, very seasonably. Also 4l. besides
has came in since the day before yesterday.

Sept. 5. Today a sister sent me 5l. for myself, to be used for the
benefit of my health. She had heard that my health is again failing.
I do not lay by money for such purposes; but whenever I really need
means, whether for myself or others, the Lord sends them, in answer
to prayer; for He had in this case again given me prayer respecting
means for myself and for the Orphans, that my way might be made plain
as to leaving Bristol for a season.

Sept. 6. My body is now so weak, and my head again so affected in
consequence of it, and I have found it needful to give up the work at
once. I left today for Trowbridge, for three days, intending
afterwards to go with my wife into Devonshire, if the Lord permit.

Sept. 7. Trowbridge. This has been a very good day. I have had much
communion with the Lord. How kind to take me from the work at Bristol
for a season, to give me more communion with Himself. I remembered
the Lordâ€™s especial goodness to me in this place, at the commencement
of last year. How kind has He also been since! I prayed much for
myself, for the Church at large, for the saints here and in Bristol,
for my unconverted relatives, for my dear wife, and that the Lord
would supply my own temporal necessities and those of the Orphans:--and
I know that He has heard me.--I am surrounded with kind friends
in the dear saints, under whose roof I am, and feel quite at home. My
room is far better than I need; yet an easy chair, in this my weak
state of body, to kneel before in prayer, would have added to my
comfort. In the afternoon, without having given a hint about it, I
found an easy chair put into my room. I was struck with the kindness,
the especial kindness of my heavenly Father, in being mindful of the
smallest wants and comforts of His child.--Having had more prayer than
usual, I found that my intercourse with the saints at tea was with
unction, and more than usually profitable. But this very fact reminds
me of my sad deficiencies, and of my great lack of real fervency of
spirit. May the Lord carry on His work with power in my soul! Today I
had 1l. given to me, half for the Orphans, and half for the other
funds. Thus the Lord has begun to answer my prayers; for I expect far
more.

Sept. 8. Lordâ€™s day. I assembled with a few saints at Trowbridge, and
spoke to them in the morning and evening with much assistance. The
afternoon I spent at home over the Word and in prayer. God has
evidently blessed the Word. He had a purpose in sending me here, both
for blessing to myself and to others.

Sept. 9. This morning I conversed with a poor aged sister in the
Lord, who for 47 years has been a believer, but who, from want of
settling by the written Word only, whether she is a believer or not,
has often had doubts about her state before God. However, I brought
the Scriptures only before her. [My pressing the Scriptures alone
upon her heart, was made such a blessing, that I hear she has not
doubted in the same way since.] This aged sister told me she often
prays for the Orphans, and for the continuance of means. How many
helpers has the Christian in the conflict; yet all are strengthened
by ONE who is ALWAYS for us!

This evening I returned to Bristol, to go from hence tomorrow to
Exeter, if the Lord permit, on account of my health. I had been
earnestly asking the Lord, while I was staying at Trowbridge, that He
would be pleased to send in supplies for the Orphans, before I go
into Devonshire, and I had the fullest assurance that means would
come in before I left Bristol. I therefore asked my wife, on my
return, how much had come in, and found that it was only 8l. 9s. 7
3/4d. This was not nearly as much as I had expected, and would not
answer the end for which I had particularly asked means, i. e. that I
might be able to leave enough for several days. My reply therefore
was, according to the faith given to me, and judging from the
earnestness and confidence of my prayer, that the Lord would send
more before I left. About an hour after, brother Craik brought me
10l., which he had received this evening with Ecclesiastes ix. 10,
and also a letter from a brother at Ilfracombe, in which the arrival
of a large box, full of articles, to be sold for the benefit of the
Orphans, is announced. Thus the Lord has dealt with me according to
my faith.

Sept. 10. This morning before I left Bristol came in still further
1l. l6s. 7d., so that I had about 20l. to leave behind for the
present need. I found also, on opening the box which has arrived, 65
books, a brace of valuable pistols, and a great many articles of East
India linen. How kind of the Lord to send these supplies just now!

After my departure from Bristol I continued to help my
fellow-labourers by my prayers. I had the fullest assurance that the
Lord would help them, and my hope was not ashamed, as will appear
from the following part of the journal.--In the evening of Sept. 10th,
we arrived in Exeter, where we were lodged by a brother, who on the
following day left for Plymouth. The love of this brother constrained
us to remain for five days at his house, though he was absent,
leaving us all the house with a sister, as a servant, to ourselves.
Though at another time I should have preferred the opportunity of
having intercourse with this brother, yet now, in this my weak state
of body, the being left alone was the very thing which suited me. I
could not but trace the kind hand of God in this circumstance. I was
able to speak twice publicly while in Exeter. I rejoiced at what I
saw there of the work of God. This city was in the year 1830
especially laid on my heart, when I used frequently to preach there;
but then there was a great spiritual deadness.

From Sept. 16th to Sept. 28th we were at Teignmouth my former field
of labour. I had not seen the brethren, among whom I used to labour,
since May, 1833. The Lord gave me strength, many times to minister in
the Word among them, during the time of my stay there. At Teignmouth
also, I had, in some respects, reason to be glad, particularly in
that I saw some of those truths practised, and that more fully and
intelligently, which, though in much weakness and indistinctly, I had
sought to set forth whilst labouring there. At Teignmouth also, as
well as in Exeter, the saints showed us much love. A brother and
sister lodged us during the whole of our stay. May the Lord reward
them for their love!--While I was at Teignmouth I received on Sept.
18th, the following letter from brother T., in reference to the work
in Bristol:--

Bristol, Sept. 16, 1839.

My dear Brother, I have delayed writing until now, that, as I hoped,
I might have additional news to tell you after the Lordâ€™s day. And
now that my hope has been made good, I rejoice to do so. The Lord has
dealt most graciously with us since your departure. The children,
brother B. and the sisters are well, and the wants of the Orphans
have been abundantly supplied. There has come in altogether 24l. 8s.
6d., &c.

On Sept. 24th, I received another letter from brother T., dated
Bristol, Sept. 23rd, in which he writes: "It rejoices me that I have
still nothing but the goodness of the Lord to tell you of. That
little word â€˜Ebenezerâ€™ is at once our encouragement and our daily
song, of which we are not weary. I have received since the last
information you had from me 5l. l7s. 4 1/4d., besides 1l. 10s. for
the rent of the Orphan-Houses."

On Sept. 28th, while I was at Teignmouth, a brother asked me about
the funds for the Orphans, being willing to help, and I had reason to
believe considerably, if they were in need. Though I knew not for a
certainty that there was one shilling in hand in Bristol, yet for the
Lordâ€™s sake I declined telling him any thing about the funds, in
order that the work might evidently be carried on by dealing with the
Lord Himself.

On Sept. 28th we left Teignmouth for Plymouth, being taken by the
love of a brother from Teignmouth to Newton Bushel in his own little
carriage. At Plymouth we found again a kind brother waiting at the
coach office, to receive us. He took us to his house and lodged us
till our departure, on Oct. 6th. During my stay at Plymouth, I was
stirred up afresh to early rising, a blessing, the results of which I
have not lost since. That which led me to it was the example of the
brother in whose house I was staying, and a remark which he made in
speaking on the sacrifices in Leviticus, "That as not the refuse of
the animals was to be offered up, so the best part of our time should
be especially given to communion with the Lord." I had been, on the
whole, rather an early riser during former years. But since the
nerves of my head had been so weak, I thought, that, as the day was
long enough for my strength, it would be best for me not to rise
early, in order that thus the nerves of my head might have the longer
quiet. On this account I rose only between six and seven, and
sometimes after seven. For the same reason also I brought myself
purposely into the habit of sleeping a quarter of an hour, or half an
hour, after dinner: as I thought I found benefit from it, in quieting
the nerves of my head. In this way, however, my soul had suffered
more or less every day, and sometimes considerably, as now and then
unavoidable work came upon me before I had had sufficient time for
prayer and reading the Word. After I had heard the remark to which I
have alluded, I determined, that whatever my body might suffer, I
would no longer let the most precious part of the day pass away while
I was in bed. By the grace of God I was enabled to begin the very
next day to rise earlier, and have continued to rise early since that
time. I allow myself now about seven hoursâ€™ sleep, which, though I am
far from being strong, and have much to tire me mentally, I find is
quite sufficient to refresh me. In addition to this I gave up the
sleeping after dinner. The result has been that I have thus been able
to procure long and precious seasons for prayer and meditation before
breakfast; and, as to my body, and the state of the nervous system in
particular, I have been much better since. Indeed I believe that the
very worst thing I could have done for my weak nerves was, to have
lain an hour or more longer in bed than I used to do before my
illness; for it was the very way to keep them weak.--As this may fall
into the hands of some children of God who are not in the habit of
rising early, I make a few more remarks on the subject.

I. It might be asked, how much time shall I allow myself for rest?
The answer is, that no rule of universal application can be given, as
all persons do not require the same measure of sleep, and also the
same persons, at different times, according to the strength or
weakness of their body, may require more or less. Females also, being
generally weaker in body, require more sleep than males. Yet, from
what I can learn, it is the opinion of medical persons, that men in
health do not require more than between six and seven hours sleep,
and females no more than between seven and eight hours; so that it
would be rather an exception, for a man to require more than seven
and a woman more than eight hours. But my decided advice, at the same
time, is, that children of God should be careful not to allow
themselves too little sleep, as there are few men who can do with
less than six hours sleep, and yet be well in body and mind, and few
females who can do with less than seven hours. Certain it is that for
a long time, as a young man before I went to the university, I went
to bed regularly at ten and rose at four, studied hard, and was in
good health; and certain also, that since I have allowed myself only
about seven hours, from the time of my visit at Plymouth in Oct.
1839, I have been much better in body, and in my nerves in
particular, than when I was eight or eight hours and a half in bed.

II. If it be asked, but why should I rise early? The reply is, to
remain too long in bed is 1. waste of time, which is unbecoming a
saint, who is bought by the precious blood of Jesus, with his time
and all he has, to be used for the Lord. If we sleep more than is
needful for the refreshment of the body, it is wasting the time with
which the Lord has intrusted us as a talent, to be used for His
glory, for our own benefit, and the benefit of the saints and the
unbelievers around us. 2. To remain too long in bed injures the body.
Just as when we take too much food, we are injured thereby, so as it
regards sleep. Medical persons would readily allow, that, the lying
longer in bed than is needful for the strengthening of the body, does
weaken it. 3. It injures the soul. The lying too long in bed, not
merely keeps us from giving the most precious part of the day to
prayer and meditation, but this sloth leads also to many other
evils.--Any one need but make the experiment of spending one, two, or
three hours in prayer and meditation before breakfast, either in his
room, or with his Bible in his hand in the fields, and he will soon
find out the beneficial effect which early rising has upon the
outward and inward man. I beseech all my brethren and sisters into
whose hand this may fall, and who are not in the habit of rising
early, to make the trial, and they will praise the Lord for having
done so.

III. It may lastly be said, but how shall I set about rising early?
My advice is, 1. Commence at once, delay it not. Tomorrow begin to
rise. 2. But do not depend upon your own strength. This may be the
reason why, before this, you may have begun to rise early, but have
given it up. As surely as you depend upon your own strength in this
matter, it will come to nothing. In every good work we depend upon
the Lord, and in this thing we shall feel especially how weak we are.
If any one rises that he may give the time which he takes from sleep,
to prayer and meditation, let him be sure that Satan will try to put
obstacles in the way. 3. Do trust in the Lord for help, You will
honour Him, if you expect help from Him in this matter. Give yourself
to prayer for help, expect help, and you will have it. 4. Use,
however, in addition to this, the following means: a, Go early to
bed. If you stay up late, you cannot rise early. Let no society and
no pressure of engagements keep you from going habitually early to
bed. If you fail in this, you neither can nor ought to get up early,
as your body requires rest. Keep also particularly in mind, that
neither for the body nor the soul is it the same thing, whether you
go to bed late and rise late, or whether you go to bed early and rise
early. Even medical persons will tell you how injurious it is to sit
up late, and to spend the morning hours in bed; but how much more
important still is it to retire early and to rise early, in order to
make sure of time for prayer and meditation before the business of
the day commences, and to devote to those exercises that part of our
time, when the mind and the body are most fresh, in order thus to
obtain spiritual strength for the conflict, the trials, and the work
of the day. b, Let some one call you, if possible, at the time which
you have determined before God that you will rise; or procure, what
is still better, an alarum, by which you may regulate almost to a
minute the time when you wish to rise. For about 12s. a little German
clock, with an alarum, may be bought almost in every town. Though I
have very many times been awakened by the Lord, in answer to prayer,
almost to the minute when I desired to rise; yet I thought it well to
procure an alarum, to assist me in my purpose of rising early: not
indeed as if it could give the least help, without the Lordâ€™s
blessing, for I should remain in bed, notwithstanding the noise of
the alarum, were He not to give me grace to rise; but simply looking
upon it as a means. c, Rise at once when you are awake. Remain not a
minute longer in bed, else you are likely to fall asleep again. d, Be
not discouraged by feeling drowsy and tired in consequence of your
rising early. This will soon wear off. You will after a few days feel
yourself stronger and fresher than when you used to lie an hour or
two longer than you needed. e, Allow yourself always the same hours
for sleep. Make no change, except sickness oblige you. .

Plymouth, Oct. 1. Today my soul was again especially drawn out in
prayer for the dear Orphans. I not merely asked the Lord that He
would still continue to supply their need, but I was so fully assured
that He had sent the necessary means since I last heard, that I was
enabled to praise Him for having done so. Immediately after I had
praised Him, but while I was yet on my knees, came another letter
from brother T., dated Bristol, Sept. 29, in which he writes thus:

"The Lordâ€™s help has been graciously continued to us since I wrote
last. Ever since your absence, the supplies have come in so
seasonably, that I have not had occasion, until now, of opening the
boxes in the Orphan-Houses. There came in, since my last account,
from a sister 2s. 6d., with Ecclesiastes ix. 10, 1l.. 1s. 6d.,
through Mr. C. of Bath, 2l. 3s. 4d., from the boxes 14s. 6 1/2d.,
from A. M. B. 5s. Some apples besides have been given, some old
clothes, and a large bath to be sold or used. I gave on Thursday to
the sisters 10l., and today for the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House 1l. 10s. After
this I have in hand 1l. 3s. 8 3/4d., to be multiplied as the Lord
wills. I had written thus far, and was on the point of writing that
we expected sister E. home this evening, when the door-bell rang, and
sister E. came in, bringing a little packet of money, directed to
you, from Hereford, enclosing a letter and ten sovereigns "for your
labours of faith and love;" so that the remainder of the barrel of
meal has been multiplied somewhat already. It is most seasonable
help! It rejoices me that it has come in time, for you to have the
intelligence with this letter. I have in hand l9s. for the other
funds, therefore it seems well to me, if it should be needed before I
hear from you, to take only 5l. for the Orphans; but, if it pleases
the Lord to enable us to do without, I shall leave it untouched until
you write. In addition to what I have written, I have just received
10s. and 1l. 9s. 3d. How gracious!"

The time from October 6th to the 17th I spent among the brethren at
Bideford and Barnstaple, with great refreshment to my own soul, and
was also allowed by the Lord to minister to them. The whole of my
stay among the children of God in Devonshire has been very profitable
to me. May my soul not lose the blessing of it! How the Lord uses our
infirmity of body for the blessing of our souls! In my case also it
was instrumental in communicating blessing to others. I was able to
speak more frequently in public, while absent from Bristol, than I
should have done under ordinary circumstances, had I remained in
Bristol.

Barnstaple, Oct. 10. The day before yesterday I had 10s. given to me
here for the Orphans; and yesterday 3l., which came in most
seasonably, as will appear from the following letter which I received
this evening from brother T.

Bristol, Oct. 8th, 1839.

"My dear Brother, we have continued to enjoy the gracious help of the
Lord since I last wrote to you. Nearly up to that time the supplies
had come in so seasonably, that the previous disbursements had
scarcely ever been expended, before I was again able to make a fresh
one. Since then, however, we have been twice a little straitened. On
Friday evening we were in prospect of Saturdayâ€™s necessities, and had
nothing to meet them, except the money about which I was in doubt
from not having received directions from you. I had already used 5l.
out of the 10l. which had been sent, and now, after waiting till it
was actually needed, we thought it an indication, as none had been
sent, that this should all go to the Orphan-Houses. On Monday again
more money was needed than I had in hand, but we were in expectation
of help. After dinner, as nothing had come in, I thought it well to
open the boxes, thinking, that, although I had opened them so
recently, I had no right to presume that the Lord had not had time to
pour into them. The expectation was not in vain; for in the box at
the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House I found 1l. 0s. 1 1/2d., in the box at the
Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House 7s. 1d. At the latter place I met sister A. who
gave me 3s. for things that she had sold. Thus we were most
graciously helped through Monday. Then, in the evening, at the
meeting I received from sister B. 2s., and through sister C. 11s. I
had opened the box at the Infant-Orphan-House on Monday, and found it
empty. But today, finding the 13s. insufficient, and being told that
something had been put in, I opened it, and found 3s. 6d., which
nicely helped us through. And we are now looking to the Lord for
more. In the mean time I shall this morning attend to the sale of
whatever has been given to be sold. It comforts us to know you are
praying for us," &c.

The money which I had received yesterday and the day before yesterday
here, at Barnstaple, and two weeks ago at Teignmouth, enabled me now
to send off at once 5l.

On Oct. 17th I returned to Bristol, with renewed strength, for active
service.

Oct. 17. Bristol. The Lord has been again very gracious as it regards
the funds; for during the last three days, while I was at Barnstaple,
I received from a sister 5s., two rings, and a brooch. From another
sister a gold watch, to be sold for the Orphans. From a brother a
seal, two ear-rings, and a brooch. From a third sister sixteen books
to be sold; also 4l., the produce of a veil. From a fourth sister 2l.
10s., and from a fifth 1l., and from five others 8s. 9d. In addition
to this I found when I came home, that though my fellow-labourers had
been greatly tried a few days previous to my return, so much so,
that, when the 5l. arrived which I sent from Barnstaple, they were in
greater poverty than they ever had been; yet, within the last days,
several pounds had come in, and yesterday, over and above all this,
arrived 15l. from London for some articles which had been sent there
to be sold. What can we render unto the Lord for all His benefits!

Oct. 19. The Lord is still pouring in bountifully! This morning 10l.
was sent from Worcester, and a sister brought 7l., being the produce
of the sale of ladiesâ€™ baskets, which she and some other sisters are
making for the benefit of the Orphans. This last case shows what
various means the Lord uses to provide for our need; yet all comes
without one single individual being asked to give help; for to the
Lord alone we speak about our need. We are now again comparatively
rich, i. e. we have means in hand to meet the current expenses of
about eight days, which has been only two or three times the case
during the last fifteen months.

Oct. 30. A little boy brought me a letter, given to him by a
gentleman and lady in the street, as he said, to take to my house.
The letter contained these words with a five pound note: "The
enclosed 5l. accept for the benefit of the Orphans, in the name of
the Lord Jesus."

Nov. 5. Today an Orphan was brought from Bath, and a lady sent by her
servant, the aunt of the child, a sovereign for the Orphans, when
there was but 3s. 11d. in hand. It has been thus repeatedly, that
when orphans have been brought, and we had no money, or scarcely any,
that the Lord sent a little with these poor children. It never is
with us any question, whether there is much or little money in hand,
so far as it regards the reception of children; but only, whether
there is room.

Nov. 8. We are now again quite poor. The Lord gave us to know more
than usually from Oct. 17th to Oct. 31st what it is to abound, and
now we know again what it is to be poor. It would have been desirable
to have had 3l. today, but only 1l. 3s. 11d, was in hand, which I
sent off. In our need we were led to open the boxes in the
Orphan-Houses, which had not been done for some weeks, and in them
was found 16s. 2 1/2d. To this one of the labourers added 9s. By this
2l. 9s. 1 1/2d. we could meet those expenses which needed to be met,
and we were thus helped through the day.

Nov. 9. Saturday. 3l. 0s. 6d. was required today, in order
comfortably to meet the present demands, but not one penny was in
hand. Between ten and eleven I went to the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, to
meet with my fellow-labourers for prayer. Only 2s. had come in. This
was all I could leave. There was every thing in the houses which was
required for the moment, and I proposed that we should meet again for
prayer in the afternoon at four. When we did so, one of the labourers
gave 8s. 6d., another 10s., another 5s. 6d., so that I had as much to
give to the matrons as would provide comfortably all the necessaries
for the children till Monday morning; only the usual quantity of
bread could not be taken in. About half an hour, after we had
separated, came in 1l. 10s., the produce of the sale of a shawl,
which a sister from Devonshire had given for that purpose some days
since. Thus we had altogether 2l. 16s., whereas when the day
commenced we had no natural prospect of any thing. This is a new
sweet encouragement. Besides this, our Father has given us another
proof of His continued care, in that twenty sacks of potatoes and a
small barrel of herrings have been sent for the Orphans.

Nov. 11. Monday morning. Yesterday, when, as just related, there was
not a penny in hand, there was given to me, with Ecclesiastes ix. 10,
ten shillings. This morning came in 1l. 10s, more, Soon afterwards a
note was sent to me from the Orphan-Houses, to say that the need of
today would be 3l. JUST WHILE I WAS READING THE NOTE I received
another, including a sovereign, which a sister from Devonshire had
given to one of the brethren for the Orphans. Thus I had just the 3l.
which was needed. A few minutes after came in 1s. more.

Nov. 12. The need of today was 2l. As only 1s. had been left in hand
yesterday, and no more than 6s. had come in, we were again in a
strait. But I was not looking at the little in hand, but at the
fulness of God. I sent off the little which I had. In the afternoon
we met for prayer. I then found that 2s. 6d. had been taken out of
the box in the Infant-Orphan-House, and that 4s. more had come in by
the sale of some old books. To this one of the labourers added 2s.
3d., all she had of her own. After prayer came in 2s. 6d., which had
been given while we were in prayer. In the evening we met again for
prayer, when another labourer gave 3s. 4d. Thus, in our deep poverty,
we got together this day 1l. 0s. 7d., which supplied our absolute
necessities. We were this afternoon so reduced, till the Lord sent a
little help, that there were no means to provide breakfast for
tomorrow, for the children in the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House.

Nov. 13. Nothing has come in. Our need is even greater today than
yesterday, on account of our not having been able yesterday to take
in the usual quantity of provisions. In this our need I packed up the
books, which had been intended for sale on Aug. 22, when the Lord
sent such a rich, supply, before they were actually disposed of. To
them one of the labourers added some of his own, and a few other
articles. Also some old jackets, which had been sent, were packed up
to be disposed of. At twelve I met with my fellow-labourers for
prayer.

There was every thing in the houses which was needed for dinner, but
there were no means to get milk for tea. (The children have milk and
water at tea time.) Three of my helpers went out to dispose of the
articles. At four in the afternoon I received the information that
14s. had come in, for some of the things which were disposed of. One
of my fellow-labourers had besides disposed of an article of his own
for 1l. 5s. This 1l. 19s. enabled us to take in bread as usual, and
to defray the other necessary expenses. We had never been lower in
means than yesterday and today. Yet my soul, thanks to the Lord! was
also yesterday and today in perfect peace. My helpers seem also quite
in peace. This evening I received 2s. 6d., and 11s. with Ecclesiastes
ix. 10. This little money is as precious, as at other times 100l.
would have been, because it is a fresh proof that our Father still
cares for us. The money was given to me just after I had been
speaking on these words: "But I am poor and needy; yet the Lord
thinketh upon me." Whilst speaking I was able, in a measure, to
realize the preciousness of the truth contained in those words, and
after speaking my Father gave me a fresh proof that He is thinking
upon me.

Nov. 14. I took the 13s. 6d. which was given last evening, early this
morning, to the Orphan-Houses, where I found that 10s. 6d. had come
in by the sale of a Hebrew Old and a Greek New Testament, which a
brother had given who had more than one copy; and 1s. 6d. for another
book. This 1l. 5s. 6d. has been divided, in the hope that our kind
Father will remember us before the day is over, and send in more.
This afternoon, when we met for prayer, I found that 18s. more had
come in for some articles which had been sold. We have had thus 2l.
3s. 6d. this day to divide for housekeeping. By the good hand of the
Lord upon us, there has been every thing really needful. May the Lord
look upon us, and help us further! Surely, He will do it!

Nov. 15. We are still in deep poverty. Nothing had come in by four
oâ€™clock in the afternoon, when I went to meet with my fellow-labourers
for prayer. I did not go in the morning, because I knew that
there was every thing which was needed till the afternoon. When
I came I found that a sister had given 2s. 6d.; a new Bible
which one of the labourers had given, who had more than one old copy,
had been sold for 10s.; also 2s. had come in, and 1s. 4d. for some
other articles which had been sold. This 15s. 10d. supplied that
which was absolutely needed for today. We are still of good courage.
We are sure that the Lord, in His own time, will deliver us out of
the trial; for were our poverty more than a trial of faith, had the
Lord in anger shut up His hands, we should not receive any thing at
all. But this is not the case. For even this very day two sacks of
potatoes were sent by the same brother who sent twenty sacks a few
days since, with the promise to send still more. We have no means to
lay in a stock for the winter, else we should have bought, perhaps,
fifty or sixty sacks; but our kind Father does it for us. There has
been also a toy chest of drawers promised for sale.

Nov. 16. Our prayer was last evening, in particular, respecting the
necessities of today, as two daysâ€™ provisions would be needed, it
being Saturday. Besides this, about 2l. 10s. was needed to pay the
weekly salaries of the brethren and sisters who labour in the
Day-Schools. For all these demands there was nothing in hand, nor
have we any more needless articles to dispose of; and useful ones we
do not consider it right to sell, as our Father knows our need. When
we met about twelve oâ€™clock this morning, I found that last evening
there had been Bibles unexpectedly sold to the amount of 1l. 11s.
6d., and about 10s. had been given besides. Thus we had nearly enough
for the School-Fund. Moreover, 15s. had come in for the Orphan-Fund.
A large sea-chest was given by a brother several months since, for
the benefit of the Orphans, which had never been disposed of, and
which, in this our great need, was sold for 15s. Yet this 15s. was
needed to pay what was due for washing; and, therefore, we had still
nothing to take in provisions with. It occurred to one of the
labourers, that there might be a little advanced on his watch, of the
money which had been laid by for rent, as had once or twice before
been done; and that the watch might be sold at quarter-day, in case
there should not come in enough to make up the deficiency. Yet even
this plan we did not any longer think to be quite Scriptural, as he
needs the watch in the Lordâ€™s service, and as our Lord is so kind,
that He would otherwise send us means, were it well for us. In short,
it appeared to us quite clear, that while we ought, in such a strait,
to dispose of things which we do not need, nothing ought to be
disposed of which is needed, in order that the Lordâ€™s own deliverance
might be so much the more manifest. All we could think of for sale
was five pewter dishes, which had been given nearly four years ago,
but which were never used, as they were not convenient. These we
agreed should be sold. About four oâ€™clock this afternoon I received
2l. 2s., which a brother and sister had brought from Leicestershire.
With this I went joyfully to the Orphan-Houses. There I found that
9s. 6d. had come in for the pewter dishes; one of the labourers had
given 10s. for the Orphans, and 10s. for the School-Fund. (There had
come in 2s. more for the other funds. All demands were met, and there
was 1s. 6d. over.) Besides this, one of the labourers had sold a book
of his own for 4s., and another labourer gave two pairs of new
gloves, and four gentlemenâ€™s stocks. One pair of the gloves had been
sold. Thus altogether had come in 4l. 2s. 3d., and therefore about
1l. 10s. more than was needed. We are now brought to the close of one
more week. This has been, perhaps, of all the weeks the most trying.
So much prayer, and so little coming in, I never knew. Yet, by the
grace of God, I was sure that help would come, after the trial of
faith was over. During the whole of this week, greatly as we have
been tried, and though twice no stock of bread could be taken in, yet
there has been nourishing food at every meal, and neither the
children nor any other person can have perceived our poverty. About
13l. has been spent even this week for housekeeping in the three
Orphan-Houses.

Nov. 18. Monday. The Lord has kindly sent in since Saturday evening
3l. 18s. 3 1/4d., and thus our need for today is supplied. On
Saturday evening the produce of an orphan-box, 5s. 1 1/4d., was
given; and last evening a sister gave two sovereigns to brother
Craik, waiting for him a long time in the chapel, till she could see
him. She might have delayed giving it till another time, as she had
to wait so long; but the Lord knew our need. There were also sent
eight sack of potatoes, by the same brother who had sent twenty-two
sacks before.

Nov. 19. As there was not enough money in hand for the necessities of
today, we were again as poor as on Saturday. Between three and four
in the afternoon the milk is generally taken in; but in the
Boysâ€™-Orphan-House there was not money enough to meet this small
expense. However, the Lord knew our need, and sent us at two oâ€™clock
13s., which helped us comfortably through the day. A sister had
purposed in her heart to give 3d. a week for the Orphans, and she
felt herself stirred up to bring the yearly amount now, in this our
extremity.

Nov. 20. This has been a day of deep poverty. Nothing but the 13s.,
above referred to, came in yesterday, which was scarcely enough to
meet yesterdayâ€™s usual need. My mind, by the grace of God, was not at
all cast down; but I felt it rather trying, that the abundance of my
other engagements had not allowed me to meet with my fellow-labourers,
either yesterday or today, for prayer. This evening I had a
note from the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, to state that a lady had
sent two dozen of boysâ€™ shirts, which she had made herself, with
which she sent 5s. to get them washed. This 5s, enabled us to meet
that which was absolutely needful. [I mention here, that while our
usual current expenses are about 2l. 10s. daily for housekeeping in
the three houses; yet we might, in case of need, do for one or two
days with as little as yesterday and today, as there are generally
potatoes and meat in the house, and a stock of bread for two days, in
order that the children may eat stale bread.] Without this 5s. we
should have been unable to procure all that was absolutely needed.
This our kind Father knew, and therefore He sent it. There were also
given two quarterns of bread by one of the bakers, which made up the
usual quantity. Moreover five and a half sacks of potatoes were sent
by the brother who sent the others, making in all 35 1/2 sacks.

Nov. 21. This morning one of the labourers gave 7s., in order that
there might be means to take in milk. Between ten and eleven oâ€™clock
we met for prayer, and I found that 10s. had come in for a toy chest
of drawers, which in this our great need had been sent for sale.
Besides this 6d. had been taken out of the box in the Infant-Orphan-House.
This 17s. 6d. enabled us to provide the dinner, and to take in a
little bread in two houses, even as much as would be enough for
breakfast tomorrow; but there was 4s. 6d. needed to buy bread
for the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, as there was only enough for today.
When we met again this afternoon, 3s. had come in, as one of the
labourers had sold a few old books. Another labourer gave 1s. 6d.,
and thus we had also the 4s. 6d., which was needed for bread. After
prayer, it was mentioned that a sister, a servant, who is out of a
situation, had been this afternoon to see the Orphan-Houses, and had
put something into the box at the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House. The box was
opened, and half-a-crown was found in it. This money was, in our deep
poverty, as acceptable as 50l. at other times might have been. We
rejoiced when we saw it, for it was a fresh proof to us, that, not in
anger, but only for the trial of our faith, we are so poor. This 2s.
6d. provides us with the means to take in milk tomorrow morning, so
that we shall have everything which is needed till after breakfast
tomorrow, but then there is neither bread, nor meat, etc. remaining
for dinner. Our comfort, however, is: "The morrow shall take thought
for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof." Matt. vi. 34. We separated very happy in God, though very
poor, and our faith much tried.

Nov. 22. Our poverty had now become very great. Greater it had never
been. Yet, the Lord be praised! I was as comfortable as ever; for I
was sure we were only for the trial of our faith in this state. Had
the Lord shut up His hand iii anger, He would not have continued to
give us, even during this week, from time to time, tokens of His care
over us. I said this morning: "Manâ€™s necessity is Godâ€™s opportunity"
is a proverb of the world, and how much more may we, His children,
now look to Him in our great need. I knew we must have help in some
way, as now it had come to the greatest extremity, there being in
none of the houses anything for dinner, except potatoes, of which we
have an abundance. At ten this morning I was informed that a large
box, bearing my address, had arrived at one of the Orphan-Houses. I
set off immediately, and found it was from the neighbourhood of
Wolverhampton. It contained 12l. for the Orphans, 1l. 11s. 10d. for
the other Funds, 4 yards of flannel, 9 yards of calico, 12 yards of
print, 4 1/2 yards of coloured cotton, 4 yards of stuff, 2 pairs of
stockings, and 3 1/4 yards of brown holland. Besides this, there were
in it the following articles for sale: 2 decanters and stands, 4
glass salt cellars, 3 scent bottles, a set of cruets and stand, 5
beer glasses, 7 chimney ornaments, 3 tortoise-shell combs, 3 fans, 2
silver vinaigrettes, 2 silver shoe-buckles, 2 waist buckles, 2 silver
salt-cellars, 1 pair of knives and forks with silver handles, a small
silver toasting fork, 9 silver coins, three gold rings, 4 pairs of
ear-rings, 3 brooches, a cornelian heart, a silver seal, 1 pair of
silver studs, 1 gold watch key, 1 silver pencil case, 5 pairs of
bracelets, 5 necklaces and 1 urn rug. The joy which I and my
fellowlabourers had when all these things lay before us, cannot be
described; it must be experienced in order that it may be known. It
was two hours and a half before the dinner time, when the help was
granted. The Lord knew that the Orphans had no dinner, and,
therefore, did He now send help.--This morning also a brother sent to
the Girlsâ€™ Orphan-House to ask whether the treacle-cask was empty,
and if so, to send it by the messenger, that it might be filled.

Nov. 24. Today 5l. came in again with Ecclesiastes ix. 10, besides
1l. 10s. for the rents.

Nov. 27. Today again some money was needed for housekeeping. But as a
little had come in yesterday and today, we had enough.

Nov. 28. Last evening 10s. came in, which was just enough to supply
this dayâ€™s need. We are now again penniless.

Nov. 29. A great part of the articles, which were sent this day week
from the neighbourhood of Wolverhampton, have now been disposed of
for 5l. 11s.; we are, therefore, supplied for today and tomorrow.

Dec. 2. Since the last money has been given out for housekeeping,
only 1l. 12s. has come in but as 1l. 10s. of this had been given for
the rents, I had only 2s. in hand, when brother B., the master at the
Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, came this morning, and told me that the need of
today would be at least 2l. I gave him the 2s. which I had, and
proposed that we should pray together for more means. WHILE WE WERE
IN PRAYER, a brother called. After prayer brother B. left me, and the
brother who had come gave me 5l. As soon as he had left, I went
joyfully with the money to the Orphan-Houses, to prevent the bakers
being sent away. This evening I received still further 2l. Thus the
Lord has richly supplied our need for today and tomorrow.

Dec. 3. The Lord has remembered again our need for tomorrow. I
received today from Liverpool 15s.; and from a brother in the
neighbourhood of London, who had been staying here for a season, 5l.;
also 1l. by the sale of some articles.

Dec. 4. It has been repeatedly our prayer during the last month and
in the beginning of this, that the Lord would be pleased to give us
again so much means, before the time of the public meetings, which
are fixed for the 10th, 11th, and 12th, of this month, that, when we
speak about His dealings with us during this year, we might also
respecting the close of it have again to speak, to His praise, of the
abundance which we had in hand. At the end of last year we made the
same request, and the Lord granted it. Now today, as an answer to
this our often repeated request, I received from the East Indies
100l., to be laid out for the Orphans, or the other objects of the
Institution. Respecting this money it is to be noticed: 1. The great
distance from whence it is sent. 2. That it comes just now, and thus
enables us to speak at the meetings of this rich supply after our
trials. 3. It furnishes us with means to order Bibles, as one half of
the money will be taken for the other funds; there having been a
great inquiry for Bibles lately, and we have not been able to meet
the demand, for want of means. Respecting this point also we have
prayed repeatedly, and now the Lord has answered our petition. How
very precious it is to wait on the Lord! What an abundant proof have
we in this donation, that all our late straits, as it regards means,
were only allowed for the trial of our faith! This evening came in
still further 1l. 5s.

Dec. 9. Since Dec. 4 several small donations have come in, so that
unto the last day of this fourth year of the Orphan-work the Lord has
continued His kindness to us.

On Dec. 10, 11, and 12 we had public meetings, at which the account
of the Lordâ€™s dealings with us in reference to the Orphan-Houses and
the other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution was given.
During the whole of the past year, as formerly, the labourers who are
engaged in the work had kept their trials and their joys of faith to
themselves; but now we considered the time to have come, when, for
the benefit of the church at large, and to the glory of our Lord, we
should make our boast in Him.--It is now (i. e. on Dec. 10, 1839) five
years and nine months since the Scriptural Knowledge Institution has
been in operation. In addition to what has been said about the Lordâ€™s
dealings with us, more especially in regard to the funds, I make a
few more remarks, with reference to His kindness to us, in other
respects, during the last year. 1. During the last year also we have
been enabled to continue to provide all the needful expenses
connected with the six Day-Schools, three for boys and three for
girls. The number of the children, who are at present in them,
amounts to 286. The number of all the children that have had
schooling in the Day Schools, through the medium of the Institution,
since its formation, amounts to 1795. 2. There are at present 226
children in the Sunday School. 3. There are 14 taught to read in the
Adult School, and there have been about 130 adults instructed in that
School, since the formation of the Institution. 4. There have been
circulated during the last year 514 copies of the Scriptures, and
5592 since March 5, 1834. 5. There has been laid out during the last
year 91l. 6s. for Missionary purposes. 6. There have been received
into the three Orphan-Houses from Dec. 9, 1838, to Dec. 9, 1839, 16
orphans. There are at present 96 orphans in the three houses. The
number of all the orphans, who have been under our care from April
11, 1836, to Dec. 9, 1839, amounts to 126.

I notice further the following points in connexion with the
Orphan-Houses.

1. Without any one having been asked for any thing by us, the sum of
3,067l. 8s. 9 1/4d. has been given to us, entirely as the result of
prayer to God, from the commencement of the work up to Dec. 9, 1839.
2. Besides this, there have also been sent many articles of clothing,
furniture, and provisions, for the use of the Orphans. 3. Without our
solicitation, three medical gentlemen (one for each house), have up
to this time, kindly given their attendance and medicines
gratuitously. 4. The hand of God is most manifest in that we have had
so little sickness, considering that so many persons during this
autumn have been suffering from fever, etc. Even in this particular I
desire publicly to acknowledge the Lordâ€™s peculiar kindness to us. 5.
Though most of the children have been brought up in a very different
manner from what we could desire, yet the Lord has constrained them,
on the whole, during this year also, to behave exceedingly well, so
much so that it has continued to attract the attention of all
observers. 6. That, however, which gives us the chief ground for
thankfulness, so far as the children are concerned, is, that in eight
of them we perceive decided proofs of a real change of heart and of
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, so that they have been received into
church fellowship. We are not surprised that these children, who are
from 9 years old and upwards, have been converted; for the conversion
of the orphans under our care has been a frequent subject of prayer
among us, and that of late more than ever; so that we fully expect,
if the Lord shall continue to give prayer for them, that soon many
more will be brought to believe in the Lord Jesus.

The total of the expenses, connected with the objects of the
Institution, exclusive of the Orphan-Houses, from Nov. 19, 1838, to
Nov. 19, 1839, is 542l. 13s. The balance in hand on Nov. 19, 1839,
was 18s. 5d. The total of the expenses connected with the three
Orphan-Houses, from Dec. 9, 1838, to Dec. 9, 1839, is 960l. 9s. 2
3/4d. The balance in hand on Dec 9, 1839, was 46l. 8s. ld.

Dec. 24. This morning we wanted again more money for the Orphans than
there was in hand. It is only eight days since the last public
meeting, when there was a balance of 46l. 8s. ld. in hand. On this
account we disposed of some silver articles and books which had been
sent within the last days for the benefit of the Orphans, by which
means we have enough for today and tomorrow.

Dec. 31. My health is much better than for years. My mental powers
also are as good as they have been at any time during the last three
years. I ascribe this to Godâ€™s blessing, through the instrumentality
of early rising, and plunging my head into cold water when I rise.



REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1839.



I. As to the church--68 brethren and sisters brother Craik and I
found in fellowship when we came to Bristol.

573 have been admitted to fellowship since we came to Bristol.

641 would be, therefore, the total number of those in fellowship with
us, had there been no changes. But

40 have fallen asleep;

33 are under church discipline

55 saints have left Bristol;

38 have left us, but are still in Bristol;

166 are therefore to be deducted from 641, so that there are only 475
at present in fellowship with us.



During the last year have been added 115, of whom 34 have been
brought to the knowledge of the Lord among us.



II. As to my temporal supplies.

The Lord has been pleased to give me during the past year

1. By the Freewill Offerings through the boxes Â£137 4s. 5d.

2. By Presents in money, from saints residing in and out of Bristol
Â£121 18s. 0d.

3. By Money through family connexion Â£42 0s. 0d.

4. By Presents in clothes, provisions, &c., which were worth to us at
least Â£12 0s. 0d.

Altogether Â£313 2s. 5d.



January 1, 1840. Our usual meeting last night was most precious! We
continued together from seven till half-past twelve. Of all the
similar meetings which we have had, it was, according to my judgment,
by far the best. Not more than five prayed; but there was much more
real prayer than at former meetings.--This morning, about one hour
after midnight, when our prayer meeting was over, I received a paper
with some money sealed up in it for the Orphans. A few minutes
afterwards I remembered that the individual who gave it was in debt,
and I was aware she had been repeatedly asked by her creditors for
payment; I resolved therefore, with out opening the paper, to return
it, as no one has a right to give whilst in debt. This was done when
I knew that there was not enough in hand to meet the expences of the
day. About eight this morning a brother brought 5l., which he had
received just then from his mother, for the Orphans. Observe, the
brother is led to bring it at once! The Lord knew our need, and
therefore this brother could not delay bringing the money. A few
hours after I received 5l. more, and 8s. 5d., also 2s. 6d., so that
we are now again supplied for three or four days.

Jan. 5. Besides the 10l. 10s. 11d, which came in on New-yearâ€™s day,
there came in on the 2nd and 4th 3l. 0s. 7d. But when now we were
again without a penny, there came in 5s., and 6d., and 1s. Also 2l.
with Ecclesiastes ix. 10, and 1l. 10s. for rent.

Jan. 7. Today, when there were again only a few shillings in hand, as
since the 5th had come in only 3s., I gave myself to prayer, when,
just after I had risen from my knees, a sister came and brought 1l.,
as a thank-offering to the Lord for the many mercies of the past
year. There came in still further today, by ten different donations
and the sale of two Reports, 2l. 17s.

Jan. 8. There were only a few shillings more in hand than was needed
for housekeeping today. Nevertheless our kind Father remembered us
before the day was over. A sister, a servant, gave me 15s.; also with
Ecclesiastes ix. 10, came in 5l. 5s., from two sisters 6s, ld., and
by sale of Reports 3s.

Jan. 22. I have repeatedly asked the Lord for means to be able to
order more Bibles, as two sorts were again exhausted. There is
moreover scarcely enough money in hand to pay the teachers next
Saturday. This afternoon I received from a sister 14l. 2s. 7d., which
she had had in the Savingsâ€™ Bank. She considered that this money
would be better used in the Lordâ€™s work, than left in the Savingsâ€™
Bank. Thus I was enabled to order some Bibles.

From Jan. 8th to 22nd came in 34l. 9s. 5d. for the Orphans, and the
donations were so seasonable, that always either something was given,
or articles which had been given for sale could be disposed of,
before the last money had been expended. But as there was today again
only very little in hand, I was led to open the orphan-box in my
house, in which I found two papers, the one containing 10s., the
other a 5l. note. In both papers was written Eccles. ix. 10. There
came in today still further above 5l. Thus our Lord has sent us what
we are likely to need for three or four days to come.

Jan. 25. I have been much in prayer this week about going to Germany:
1, To see certain brethren who purpose to go as Missionaries to the
East Indies; and 2, To see my father once more. I am led to go just
now, instead of delaying it, because my health is again so failing,
that it seems desirable I should leave Bristol at all events, and
thus I could continue to serve in the work of the Lord, and yet
attend to the benefit of my health at the same time. Lord, keep me
from making a mistake in this matter!

Jan, 31, Since Jan. 22 several small donations came in for the
Orphans, and several pounds by the sale of silver articles, trinkets,
&c. But as I have had to pay out today 11l. 13s., we are now again
very poor. For many days past we have been so helped, that money has
always come in, before all was spent. Now there is only 1s. 5d. in
hand. The Lord will provide! I feel quite comfortable, though in
three days I shall have to leave the work for several week.--About
three hours after I had written the above, came in 1l. 14s. l 1/2d.
In the afternoon I received still further from Tottenham for the
Orphans 10l., and in the evening from Hereford 30l., of which latter
sum there was 6l. for the Orphans, and 24l. for the other objects of
the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. Thus the Lord will kindly allow
me to leave a little money behind on my departure, and I have also a
still further answer to my prayer for means to purchase Bibles, for
which I have asked the Lord repeatedly, and which he began to answer
by the donation which I received on the 22nd. I have received 5l.
besides for the other objects.

Feb. 1. I have now felt quite sure for several days past, that I
should leave Bristol for a season, and go to Germany. If the Lord
permit, I shall leave the day after tomorrow.

Feb. 2. Today and yesterday has come in still further, before my
departure, nearly 9l. for the Orphans. How kind of the Lord to send
this money just now, on the eve of my leaving home!

Feb. 3. Today I left Bristol for Berlin.

On Feb. 5th I left London in the steamer for Hamburg. Though it had
been so very stormy for several weeks past, the Lord gate us a very
favourable passage; the first, as the captain said, which they had
had for several weeks. We landed at Hamburg on the 7th at five in the
afternoon. The porter who carried my things led me, as I afterwards
found out, some by-way, either to save a long distance, or to get me
into the city with my luggage, though it was after the custom-house
hours. I did not understand this at first; but, when we were about to
enter the city, he told me that that was not the proper way, but that
if I would give to the custom-house officer, whom I should presently
see at the entrance into the city, a small fee, he would let me pass.
My reply was that I did not wish to do what was unlawful, nor should
I give a fee to encourage what was unlawful, and that I would rather
go a long way round, than get by such means into the city. Presently
we arrived at the place at which the custom-house officer stood, who,
on my telling him plainly that I had not the least wish to pass that
way, if it were unlawful, saw that I was only a passenger, and that I
had no wish to get into the city with goods which are not duty free,
and therefore let me pass. This little circumstance proves afresh in
how many little things the children of God may act differently from
the world, to the glory of their Father, and how in going the Lordâ€™s
way, we find it to be, even as far as this life is concerned, the
easiest path.--About half an hour after, when I arrived at the hotel,
a little circumstance served afresh to remind me, that the Christian,
like the bee, might suck honey out of every flower. I saw upon a
snuffer-stand in bas-relief, "A heart, a cross under it, and roses
under both." The meaning was obviously this, that the heart which
bears the cross for a time meets with roses afterwards. I applied it
to myself, and this little event greatly cheered my heart in this
place, where I was without the fellowship of a single believer.

I left Hamburg in the evening of Feb. 8th, travelled all night, all
day, and the whole of the second night, and reached Berlin on the
morning of the 10th. I confessed not the Lord Jesus on this long
journey, which I record here to my shame; nor did I give any other
testimony for Jesus in the steamer, than merely refraining from the
light and trifling conversation of the party, and all this after I
had had on my way from Bristol to London a fresh encouragement in
conversing with a gay traveller addicted to drinking, who evidently
listened with a measure of attention, and with a desire of having his
chains broken.

From Feb. 10th to 20th I was in Berlin. I think it is likely that
eight or nine brethren and sisters will go from hence to the East
Indies.--After having been greatly helped by the Lord in my work, the
first and special object of my journey to the Continent; mercifully
kept by Him in the narrow path and in great peace, whilst surrounded
with temptations on every side; and after having also seen afresh
abundant reason to praise the Lord for all the way in which He had
led me since I lived here in 1828 and 1829; I left Berlin on the
evening of Feb. 20th for Magdeburg, which I reached on the morning of
the 21st, and on the same evening I arrived at my fatherâ€™s house.--In
all human probability I now see my dear father the last time. He is
evidently much weaker than he was two years ago, and coughs much
more. What has the Lord done for me since I lived in the house where
I am now! The two rooms where I am now most in prayer, reading the
Word, and confessing His name, were those very rooms in which I
sinned most, whilst living here many years ago. I have had again
opportunity, most fully to bring out the truth about the work of the
Lord Jesus before my father, whilst conversing a long time with a
woman in his hearing, to whom I showed from the Scriptures, that we
are to be saved, not by our own works, but simply by faith in the
Lord Jesus, who bore the punishment instead of us, and who fulfilled
the law in our room.

Feb. 24 and 25. I am still at Heimersleben. My dear father is very
weak.

Feb. 26. This morning I left Heimersleben. I took leave of my father
most probably for the last time. It has been a great pleasure to me,
and I consider it a great privilege, to have been permitted by the
Lord once more to see my father, once more personally to show him
filial love and regard, and once more to set the truth before him. He
has been again during the whole of this my stay most affectionate to
me, as he was during my two former visits to him since I left the
Continent to reside in England. How cheerfully should I have left him
this morning, did I know him to be safe in Jesus! But, alas! he as
yet is not resting upon Christ, though he is so far religious as to
read prayers and the Bible.--After I had left him I went to my
faithful and beloved friend, brother Stahlschmidt, at Sandersleben,
but found him absent from home.

Brother Kroll, the servant of brother Stahlschmidt, [whom I have
mentioned in the first part of my Narrative,] received me with much
affection. When this brother first came to Sandersleben in 1829,
there was scarcely a single true Christian besides his master in the
little town. Soon afterwards he began to hold meetings, which were
attended by the two or three who loved the Lord Jesus. These meetings
were for a long time suffered to go on quietly; but when the Lord
blessed them, and others were stirred up to care about their souls,
brother Kroll had to appear before the magistrates, and was forbidden
to hold them. When this was of no effect, (as he considered that he
ought only to obey earthly rulers in things in which he could do so
with a good conscience,) and they continued still to meet together,
the police came into one of their meetings, and forced them to
discontinue it. When even this availed nothing, the brethren were
finally threatened that every one who attended these meetings should
pay three thalers, and every one who read or spoke at them should pay
five, which is a large sum in Germany for poor people. But
notwithstanding all these obstacles, the few poor saints continue
their meetings, but in secret, to be unmolested by the police. They
have now neither a stated place nor a fixed time for their meetings.
On the second and third evenings, whilst I was at Sandersleben, I met
with them. On the second evening we were in the room of a poor
weaver. The dear brethren would have me sit on the only chair which
was in the room. It was a very small room, perhaps twice as large as
the loom, which was in it. There were about twenty-five or thirty
persons present, many of whom had seated themselves in and under the
loom, and the rest sat on two or three little forms. These meetings
were very precious. The very fact of going to them with the feeling
of having to pay the fine, or to suffer an adequate imprisonment,
should one be found there, makes them to be doubly valued; and I
believe that the Lordâ€™s double blessing rests upon them. I spoke long
both times; indeed, as long as I had strength, and the dear people
seemed to eat the Word.--I have so circumstantially related these
facts, that thereby the children of God in Great Britain may be led
more highly to value their religious privileges, and to make good use
of them whilst they are continued.

It is worthy of remark, that while the meeting at Sandersleben were
permitted to continue, there was no believing clergyman in the little
town; but about the time that they were forbidden, the Lord sent a
brother who truly preaches the gospel. I had for some hours refeshing
and most affectionate brotherly intercourse with Him. May the Lord
let His blessing rest upon him, and help him to be a faithful witness
for God in that dark neighbourhood!

I had travelled so fast, and stayed so short a time in the places
where I had been, that I was obliged to leave Heimersleben without
having received the letter which I had expected from my wife there, a
matter of no small trial (as those who have been for some time at a
great distance from home, know it to be); especially in my case, as,
on account of the Orphans and the other work, besides my family, it
was of so much importance for me to hear from time to time. I had
arranged with my father to have the letter sent to me to
Sandersleben, by an express messenger, who could be obtained for a
small remuneration. However, hour after hour passed away, on the
27th, and the messenger did not arrive. At last the time was gone by,
as it was getting dark, and the person ought to have come at noon. I
now lifted up my heart to the Lord, beseeching Him to give me grace
to give up my own will in this thing. No sooner had I been brought
into such a state, as to be TRULY content and satisfied with the will
of the Lord in this matter, than the expected letter was handed over
to me. The woman who brought it had lost her way in the morning, on
account of a dense fog, which made her so late. I have frequently
found, under similar circumstances, that after I had been brought
into such a state as to be willing to give up my own will, whereby I
was fitted to bear the blessing, the Lord gave me the desire of my
heart, according to the truth of that word: "Delight thyself also in
the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart." Psalm
xxxvii. 4.

Feb. 29. This morning I left Sandersleben. Towards the evening I
reached Halberstadt, the town where I was from Easter 1816 to June
1821, at the Cathedral Classical School. I went to a certain small
inn, known to me from the time that I lived at Halberstadt, both for
the sake of quietness and to save expense, as I knew it to be more
like a private boarding-house than an inn. After having had my
supper, the innkeeper, who seemed to me a quiet and unassuming
person, came into the room where I was, and began conversation with
me. After a few moments I recognised in him a former schoolfellow of
mine. The Lord now enabled me to tell him of my gay life, my
conversion, my subsequent going to England, and of some of the Lordâ€™s
dealings with me there. He listened with great attention, and was
evidently affected by what I said. May the Lord bless to him my
testimony for Jesus! I was thus afresh reminded of what grace has
done for me. How kind of the Lord to direct me to that place!

March 1. This morning I saw an old friend of mine, a missionary to
the Jews at Halberstadt. When first he went there he held meetings,
which the few Christians of the town attended; but of late he has
been obliged by the police to give them up. In that town of about
15,000 inhabitants, with, I think, seven large Protestant churches,
there is not one converted clergyman, as this brother told me; and
the few Christians that are there are not permitted to assemble
themselves together. Brethren, you who live in Great Britain, be
thankful for your religious liberty, and make use of it while the
days of outward peace last!--About twelve this morning I left by the
mail for Brunswick. The Lord enabled me to preach Christ to a young
man, a painter, who, for the sake of improvement in his art, had
travelled far and wide, and was now returning home from Vienna to his
parents. He listened very attentively, in which I had a fresh proof
that one never ought to look at natural appearances in proclaiming
the truth; for I judged, before I began to speak to him, from his gay
appearance, that he would quite laugh at what I might tell him about
Jesus.--I saw again this afternoon, at Wolfenbuttel the inn from
whence I ran away, when in debt, in the year 1821, and praised the
Lord for His goodness to me since that time. Now, this evening, I am
at Brunswick, and shall have again, through the Lordâ€™s kindness, rest
during the night, as the mail does not leave for Hamburg until nine
tomorrow morning.

March 8. London. I left Brunswick on the 2nd, and arrived at Hamburg
in 24 hours. As there was ice in the Elbe, the London steamer could
not get up to Hamburg, and I had therefore to go alone, in a hired
carriage to Cuxhaven, about eighty miles, the most expensive journey
that ever I made in my life, for it cost above 3l. 10s. Thus I had to
travel three days and two nights, with the interruption of only five
hours at Hamburg. I reached Cuxhaven at half-past eight in the
evening on March 4th.--The fact of having thus to travel from Hamburg
to Cuxhaven, that being the only way in which I could have got there
in my circumstances, without losing the steamer, showed me afresh how
one is step by step cast upon the Lord. A month since the Elbe was
cleared of ice, and now, contrary to the expectation of all, the cold
had returned to such a degree, that it was a second time innavigable.

March 3. I embarked this morning for London. I had conversation with
two Russian Jews, who listened with great interest to all I said to
them; but I did not tell them plainly that I believed Jesus of
Nazareth to be the Messiah, as I fully purposed to do at the next
conversation. After I had left them, they conversed with each other,
and I could see from their countenances, that they either took me for
a baptized Jew, or for a missionary to the Jews, on account of the
peculiar way in which I had conversed with them. Presently one of
them came and asked me what I thought of that Jesus. No sooner had I
owned Him as the true Messiah and as my Lord and my God, than he
began to blaspheme; and from that time, as long as we were on board,
they shunned me; and I also felt that all I had to do was to show
kindness to them by actions, but no more to converse with them about
the Messiah, in order to keep them from blaspheming that holy name
which is dear to my heart. My conversation with them had, however, an
unexpected effect in another way. At the dinner table I was asked by
one of the passengers about those Jews, who they were, etc., as my
long conversation with them on the deck had been noticed. This led
me, (in order that the conversation might be turned to profitable
subjects, and that I might discover whether there was a Christian at
the table), to throw out the remark, "how remarkable it is that the
Jews, in all parts of the world, can be recognised as such; and are
not mixed with other nations," etc. Immediately the captain replied,
"this can only be explained by the Scriptures, and shows the Bible to
be true," or something to that effect. I now, in agreeing with the
captain, followed up the subject, and both after dinner and
repeatedly during the passage had long and most interesting
conversations with the captain, whom I found to be a true brother in
the Lord, and from whom I separated most affectionately on our
arrival in London.

On March 7th I landed in London, where I found two letters from my
dear wife, from which I saw that up to the last the Lord had been
dealing with her, as well as with me, in the greatest kindness, and
had given also an abundance for the Orphans during the whole time of
my absence.

March 9. I left London this morning, arrived this evening in peace in
Bristol, and found my dearest Mary and all in peace. Truly, the Lord
has abundantly blessed me and them while I have been from home!

During the whole time of my absence the Lord not only supplied all
the need of the Orphans, but on my return I found more in hand than
there was when I left. The donations, which came in during my
absence, amount to between 80l. and 90l.

March 11. Today I received 19l. 19s., being a legacy left to me by a
brother who fell asleep the beginning of last December. How richly
does the Lord supply all my own temporal necessities!

March 22. Today, when there was not a penny in hand for the Orphans,
I received the following donations: 3l. as the produce of the sale of
ladiesâ€™ baskets, an old crown piece, an old half-crown piece, and a
Spanish dollar. Also 1s. With Eccles. ix. 10, was given 2l. 10s.

March 23. Today came in still further 1l. 2s. 6d.

March 25. All money was now again given out, when today came in by
the sale of Reports 8s. 9d., and in small donations 1l. 5s. 11d.

March 26. On the 17th of this month 1 received the following letter,
from a brother who several times had been used by the Lord as an
instrument in supplying our need, and who also two months since sent
30l.

"I have received a little money from ----. Have you any present need
for the Institution under your care? I know you do not ask, except
indeed of Him whose work you are doing; but to answer when asked
seems another thing, and a right thing. I have a reason for desiring
to know the present state of your means towards the objects you are
labouring to serve: viz, should you not have need, other departments
of the Lordâ€™s work or other people of the Lord may have need. Kindly
then inform me, and to what amount, i. e. what amount you at this
present time need, or can profitably lay out."

At the time when this letter came, we were indeed in need, or at
least it was desirable, as far as I had light, to have means, as I
was just on the point of establishing an Infant-School, and as again
some sorts of Bibles were needed in order to go on with the
circulation of the Scriptures. Also in the Orphan-Fund there was only
2s. 3 1/2d. Nevertheless I considered that, as I have hitherto acted,
(i. e. telling the Lord alone about our need), I ought to continue to
do, as otherwise the principal object of the work, to be a help to
the saints generally, by seeking to lead them to increased dependence
upon God alone, through this Institution, would be frustrated. I
answered therefore the letter, in substance, as follows:

"Whilst I thank you for your love, and whilst I agree with you, that,
in general, there is a difference between asking for money, and
answering when asked, nevertheless in our case I feel not at liberty
to speak about the state of our funds, as the primary object of the
work in my hands is, to lead those who are weak in faith to see that
there is reality in dealing with God alone."

After having sent off the answer, I was again and again led to pray
to the Lord in this way: "Lord, thou knowest that for Thy sake I did
not tell this brother about our need. Now, Lord, show afresh that
there is reality in speaking to Thee only about our need, and speak
therefore to this brother, so that he may help us."

Today, in answer to this my request, this brother sent 100l., of
which sum I shall take 20l. for the Orphans, and 20l.. for each of
the other objects. Thus I have means for establishing the
Infant-School, and for ordering more Bibles. Also the Orphans are
again supplied for a week; for when the money came in there was not
one penny in hand for them.

April 7. This evening I received information from my little half
brother that my dear father died on March 30th. He was taken worse a
few days after I left him. How kind of the Lord to have allowed me
once more to see him! Had I gone to Germany at the time I first
intended, he would most likely not have been alive to see me.--As I
know not of one believer in the whole town where he lived, I cannot
for a certainty ascertain any thing about his state before his death;
but that which I do know gives me no proof of his having died in the
faith of Christ. As to myself, I am sure of this, that it becomes me
to adore that wonderful grace which plucked me as a brand out of the
burning, and to say in reference to my dear departed father: "Shall
not the judge of all the earth do right?" and in submission to the
will of God to be satisfied with His dealings. This, through grace, I
am able to do. Every true believer who has unconverted parents, for
whose spiritual welfare he is concerned, can understand what joy it
would have been to me to have heard a satisfactory account of a true
change of heart in my dear father before his end; but as it has been
otherwise, I know nevertheless that God will be eternally glorified
even in this dispensation. During no period did I pray more
frequently or more earnestly for the conversion of my dear aged
parent, than during the last year of his life; but, at all events, it
did not please the Lord to let me see the answer to my prayers.

April 9. Through the 20l. which came in on March 26, and a number of
smaller and larger donations since then, we have had for the last
twelve days more than usual. But now today our means were again
reduced to 7s. 10d., when the Lord sent in 5l. through a brother in
Bristol, who during this year also, as at former times, has been the
instrument in the hands of God of repeatedly supplying our need when
we were very poor.

We are on the point of sending some money to the East Indies for
Missionary objects. Whilst I was on my knees respecting this object,
5l. was brought for it.

April 10. Today came in still further for the Orphans, with Eccles.
ix. 10, 5l.; also 2l.

April 19. For several months past it had appeared to brother Craik
and me, and to several other brethren who help us in the work of
caring for the saints, that a part of the church meeting together at
Gideon Chapel was a hinderance to our giving that clear and distinct
testimony respecting the principles on which we meet, which we desire
to give to the world and to the church at large in this city. As the
Lord, however, had so abundantly blessed our labours in that place,
in the conversion of sinners, and also in the building up of many
saints, we felt that we ought to act in this matter with the greatest
prayerfulness and consideration; and we had therefore many meetings
for prayer and deliberation with several brethren. On this account it
was likewise, that though we came as early as the 17th of January to
the conclusion that it would be better to relinquish Gideon as a
meeting place, we still deferred the matter for two months and a half
longer, before we even mentioned our difficulties publicly. At last,
on March 30th, we assembled with all the saints, and brother Craik
and I stated to them our difficulties. The following is the substance
of what was stated at the meeting.



Brief statement of certain difficulties connected with our continuing
to retain the occupancy of Gideon Chapel, Newfoundland Street,
Bristol.



In order to enter into the force of the following particulars, it is
necessary to keep in mind the position which, as a body of saints, we
seem called upon to maintain, in this city, before the church and the
world. We meet simply as believers in Christ, without reference to
any sectarian distinction, maintaining the Scriptures as our only
rule of doctrine and discipline, and affording freedom for the
exercise of any spiritual gift which the Lord may be pleased to
bestow. We thus hold out a gathering place for all who believe in the
Lord Jesus, and desire to confess His name, by obedience to His
authority. Whatever impedes us, in this our great work, can only be
suffered to continue, if the Lord Himself lays it upon us as a burden
or chastisement. Nothing but necessity can justify our putting any
obstacles in the way of the saints in this city, who, feeling the
obligation of separating from every sectarian bond of union, would
desire to meet with us.



I.



1. There seems no sufficient reason for holding our Lordâ€™s day
morning meetings, for the breaking of bread, in two different places.
See 1 Cor. xi. 20. The number is not too large to assemble in one
place, and the extent of locality is not so great as to prevent it,
except in the ease of invalids or of very aged persons: and the
disadvantages of two meeting places are very serious. In this way of
meeting the gifts are needlessly divided, as the gifted brethren are
in two places instead of one; discipline is rendered very difficult
to be executed, as it can scarcely be ascertained who absent
themselves, etc.; and impediments are thrown in the way of mutual
intercourse and acquaintance, as the saints sometimes go to the one
place, and sometimes to the other.

2. There are only four ways in which we can so arrange as to assemble
every Lordâ€™s day morning, as a church, together. a, Bethesda may be
given up, and the meeting of the saints maybe at Gideon. b, The
meetings maybe alternately at each place. c, The meetings may be held
at a third place intermediate, in respect of locality, between the
two. d, Gideon may be given up, and Bethesda alone become the place
of meeting for breaking of bread.

--In regard to the first two of these four arrangements, the size of
Gideon puts a complete obstacle in the way, as there would not be
sufficient room, were the saints and others, who would still attend,
to meet together in that place. The third plan appears to be freest
from all objections, could it be accomplished; but there is no one
other place to be obtained sufficiently large for our purpose, and
therefore, if it be granted that the profit of the saints and the
glory of Christ seem to require our having one gathering place, till
the number of the saints and the extent of locality on which they
reside shall force us to have more than one: the only way in which,
for the present, this can be accomplished is by our relinquishing
Gideon, and having Bethesda as our only place of meeting.6



II.



But the above are not the only reasons why we should no longer
continue to retain Gideon as a meeting place for the church.--We have
reason to believe that several of our dear brethren, who have been in
the habit of assembling there for worship, do not see with us in
reference to the great leading principles on which we professedly
meet. Ever since the removal of any restraint upon the exercise of
whatever gift the Spirit may bestow, in connexion with the practice
of weekly communion at Gideon, there has been dissatisfaction on the
part of some. A few have left and gone to other places, some have
been in the habit of remaining only as long as there is teaching or
exhortation, and then leaving without breaking bread. We have reason
to believe that several do not, in heart, acknowledge us as taught of
God in regard to the changes, which we have introduced; or, if they
feel unwilling to say so, yet they are inclined to retain their old
way. Now, spiritual rule can only be continued over those who yield
willing subjection: an unwilling submission on the part of those who
are in the place "of the ruled," we deem no true subjection at all.
Therefore, those who do not believe that matters are conducted
amongst us in a Scriptural way, cannot comfortably continue in
fellowship with us: and by yielding up to them the use of the Chapel,
we take away all just cause of complaint.--On account of these
reasons there would be no need of leaving a meeting place under other
circumstances; but as, when brother Craik and I came to Gideon
Chapel, we found saints there assembled together in fellowship who
had contributed towards the purchasing and fitting up of the Chapel,
and who had been in the habit of meeting together on different
principles, it seems not Christlike either to force our light upon
them, or to constrain them to leave us; but to give up the Chapel to
them, as they do not, in heart, go along with us. It cannot be
expected that, for the sake of pleasing even those whom we love in
Christ, we should shrink back from carrying out any truth which the
Lord may lead us into; and, therefore, if our brethren cannot
heartily go along with us, it is better that nothing should be
imposed upon them contrary to their convictions. If it should be said
that for the sake of a few we thus separate from many: our reply is,
that we separate from none of the saints; we only withdraw from a
building, because it appears to us a hinderance to the manifesting of
the truth, and, at the same time hold out a gathering place for all
who feel that it would be for the edification of their souls, and the
glory of God, that they should continue to meet with us. We invite
all those who conscientiously can submit to the order which obtains
amongst us, to continue in fellowship with us; and we purpose to
provide a place of meeting to suit the convenience of the feeble and
aged who would feel the distance of Bethesda to be an obstacle to
their meeting habitually with the saints there.



III.



But in addition to those already mentioned, there is a third class of
difficulties connected with retaining Gideon. The present character
of the meeting for the breaking of bread there, is very far from
fully exhibiting the principles on which we meet together.
Unbelievers sitting among the saints, hinders our appearing to meet
for the breaking of bread, and renders it necessary that a disturbing
pause should intervene between the act of breaking bread and the
other part of the meeting. We cannot have the breaking of bread at
the commencement of the meeting, because of the confusion occasioned
by the intermixture of those who are not in fellowship with us. To
alter this, and to request all who are not in fellowship with us
(except those belonging to the families of the saints) to sit by
themselves, as is the case at Bethesda, would, we fear, produce
increased dissatisfaction. Such a request moreover would not be
Christlike, as long as from the construction of the building no
comfortable sittings were reserved for any besides the saints
themselves. Thus, by retaining Gideon, we are under the necessity of
either marring our testimony to the church at large, or of deepening
the dissatisfaction prevalent among several who are already in
fellowship with us.--Again, the very construction of the place renders
it unsuitable for a meeting of saints. Part of the sittings being
pews, necessarily tends to give the appearance of a distinction
between the very poor and the more respectable class. This
distinction would need to be done away, and we have every reason to
fear that some might feel personally aggrieved by the pews being
taken away and replaced with benches. We have only of late understood
that some of the pews are looked upon as private property. This is
such a violation of the statement that the sittings are all free,
that it could no longer be permitted. To require these unscriptural
practices to be renounced, we have reason to apprehend, would be
considered as an arbitrary act of rule, and might alienate the minds
of those of our dear brethren who are still, in heart, attached to
that to which they hare been accustomed in former years.

If it can be shown that the above difficulties are capable of being
removed, or that any greater evil would attend the yielding up of
Gideon than the evils which necessarily accompany our retaining it,
then we are bound not to give it up. But, according to our present
light, we see no way of reconciling the two objects, viz.: the
retaining of Gideon, and the exhibiting a full, unhindered testimony
to the truth of God. We repeat it, that we do not separate from any
single individual in fellowship with us, we only leave the walls of a
building, and invite those who feel called upon to separate from
every sectarian system, and to meet where free exercise is afforded
for every spiritual gift, to assemble with us at Bethesda.

In the case of those who are in ordinary health, the inconvenience
attending the locality of Bethesda is a matter of very little
consequence. Half an hourâ€™s earlier rising on the morning of the
Lordâ€™s day, would be sufficient, in most cases, fully to meet the
difficulty; and the consciousness, that the glory of Jesus and the
true welfare of His church were thereby promoted, would far more than
compensate for the amount of self-denial which the inconvenience
arising from the distance would impose.--In reference to the weak,
the sickly, and the very aged, who reside in the neigbourhood of
Gideon, we trust, in the strength of the Lord, to make such ample
provision for their comfort on the Lordâ€™s day, that they may have no
reason to regret that Gideon has been relinquished. Lastly, as it
regards the opportunities which will be lost, by giving up Gideon, of
proclaiming the truth among believers, as well as preaching the
gospel to the world, we intend, according to our ability and the
measure of gift amongst us, to open places for those purposes in
different parts of the city.



After we had fully stated our minds respecting our difficulties in
continuing to meet, as a church, at Gideon Chapel, we were still
quite willing to continue to occupy it as a preaching place, provided
the brethren whose property the Chapel was (because of their having
contributed towards the purchase and fitting up of the building,)
were perfectly satisfied with our doing so. If this had been the
case, all the difference would have been, that on Lordâ€™s day mornings
Gideon Chapel would have been shut, and all the church would have met
at Bethesda; but we should have been willing not only to preach in
Gideon on the Lordâ€™s day evenings, and once or twice in the week, but
also on the Lordâ€™s day afternoons instead of the morning meeting: so
that even the unconverted, or the believers of that neighbourhood,
who are not in communion with us, should have been no losers.--Whilst
nothing was stated by any one, that showed us we had been mistaken in
the conclusion to which we had come, a point was mentioned which soon
brought the matter to a final decision. It was said that the giving
up of one of the principal meetings on the Lordâ€™s day would be
against the spirit of the trust deeds, as the Chapel was particularly
intended to be a preaching place. Now, though we did not see it to be
thus, as we meant to preach the Word, as before, at Gideon, if it
could be done in perfect harmony with the owners of it; yet it seemed
beyond a question that we could not retain the Chapel, whilst we
appeared, even in the least to alienate the property from the use for
which it was said to have been intended. We, therefore, were
confirmed by this in our conclusion to give up the Chapel at once,
and that entirely. [In order that the aged and infirm, and invalids
who live in the neighbourhood of Gideon, might not be losers by the
change, cars were provided, at the expense of the church, to convey
them to the meeting for the breaking of bread at Bethesda; and a
Chapel was rented in Callow-hill Street, near Gideon, in which, on
the Lordâ€™s day and Thursday evenings the Word was ministered, It was
very kind of the Lord to order it so that this chapel was at once to
be had! Two years and a half afterwards, in October, 1842, we rented
a still more suitable Chapel, in the heart of the City. On April
19th, 1840, we preached for the last time at Gideon, after having
laboured there, with abundant blessing, for about eight years. Only
three saints, as far as I know, out of about 250, who used to meet
with us at Gideon, remained there. Nor has the Lord ceased to bless
our labours since we left.]

April 27. Monday. The Lord knew that we were penniless, and should be
in need of fresh supplies today for the Orphans, therefore He moved
the hearts of some of His children to remember us, in answer to our
prayer. Yesterday I received with Eccles. ix. 10, 5l., and 10s. from
a sister who had lent this sum to some one, but never expected it
again; and now, having unexpectedly received it, gave it to the Lord
for the Orphans. 1l. 10s. was given for the rent of the
Orphan-Houses. There was 2s. 6d. put anonymously into the box at
Bethesda, and also 1l. This morning I was informed that 5l. had been
sent to the Infant-Orphan-House. Thus the Lord has given for our need
13l. 2s. 6d.

Let us pause here a few moments, beloved reader! Let us adore the
Lordâ€™s kindness! See how seasonably the Lord sends the help. As our
need is, so He remembers us. It is not now and then that He is
mindful of us, but continually. As surely as we stand in need of any
thing, He sends it; be it money, provisions, clothes, or any thing
else. We may be allowed to be poor, yea, very poor; we may have to
pray again and again to our Father before the answer comes; we may be
reduced so as to have from mal to meal to wait upon Him; yea,
according to all outward appearance, the Lord may seem to have
forgotten us:--but, amidst it all, as surely as we really need any
thing, in His own time and way does He send help. Perhaps you may
say; "But how would you do, in case there were a mealtime to come and
you had no provisions for the children, or they really wanted
clothes, and you had no money to procure them?" Our answer is, such a
thing is impossible as long as the Lord shall give us grace to trust
in Him, (for "whosoever believeth on Him shall not be ashamed,") and
as long as He shall enable us to carry on the work in uprightness of
heart. But should we be ever so left to ourselves as to forsake the
Lord and trust in an arm of flesh, or should we regard iniquity in
our heart i. e. wilfully and habitually do any thing, either in
connexion with the work or otherwise, which is against the will of
God, then we may pray and utter many words before Him, but He will
not hear us, as it is written: "If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me." Psalm lxvi. 18. I, therefore, beseech all who
love our Lord Jesus and who may read this, to entreat Him on behalf
of all of us who are engaged in this work, that He would be pleased
to continue to give us faith, and that He would keep us from living
in sin.

May 2. Nothing having come in for five days, we were today again
penniless. In answer to prayer 5s. 6d. came in, and some trinkets
were sent, the names of which the donor does not wish to be known.
Thus we were helped through this day.--Observe here, how the Lord
allowed five days to pass away without influencing the hearts of any
to send us supplies; but the moment there is real need, the stream
runs again.

May 3. Today the Lord sent in again some money for the Orphans. He
knew we were penniless, and therefore answered our requests. Besides
1l. 10s. for rent, there came in 1l. 1s. from London, and 2l. from
the Isle of Wight.

May 4. By what came in yesterday, we were supplied for today; but the
Lord sent today still more, as that which came in yesterday was only
enough for today. There was given in money 7l., of which 3l. was the
profit of the sale of ladiesâ€™ baskets, which are made by some sisters
in the Lord for the benefit of the Orphans.

Last evening a brother was baptized, who on the first Lordâ€™s day of
this year came with his intended wife to Bethesda Chapel. Both were
in an unconverted state. They both were at the same meeting, through
what brother Craik said, made to feel the power of the truth, and, in
consequence, were led to Jesus and found peace in Him, and are now
both in communion with us.--The Lord still condescends to use us as
instruments. Today we conversed with seven persons about fellowship,
and had to send away five, being worn out after we had seen the
seven, one after the other. Only since April 1st, forty-one persons
have come to us to speak about their souls. May the Lord in mercy
give us helpers in the work, for truly the harvest is great; and may
not our ingratitude for His abundant blessing upon our labours oblige
Him to shut up His hands from continuing to use us!

May 6th. This evening I received 10l. for the Orphans, and 10l. for
the Infant-School, which we are on the point of opening. Before our
little stock is quite exhausted, (for there is yet 2l. left for the
Orphans) the Lord has thus kindly sent a fresh supply. Thus also my
prayer is answered in being able to give to two of the sisters in the
Orphan-Houses some money for their personal expenses.

May 8. There are four believers staying at my house, and today we had
only a few shillings of our own money left. I gave myself, therefore,
to prayer for means for our own personal expenses. In answer to my
request, I received this morning 5l.

May 10. Today five of the Orphans were received into fellowship and
baptized. There are now fourteen of them in fellowship.

May 16. The need of today, as we were again penniless, led us to open
the boxes in the Orphan-Houses, in which 2l. 0s. 2d. was found. There
was given 5s. besides. In the evening came in still further a
sovereign from a sister, a servant, with the following lines: The
Lord has put it into my heart to send a sovereign to the Orphans. He
indeed put it into my heart, which was once at enmity with God and
would have said, lay it by, you may want it when you are old; but
then I could not look towards heaven and say, I know my Heavenly
Father will supply all my need; neither could I say, â€˜Abba, Father,â€™
for I knew Him not."

May 17. Today the Lord has sent a little more, so that we have enough
to meet the demands of tomorrow. There came in altogether 3l. 9s. 6d.

May 22. Several small donations enabled us to supply the necessities
of the last four days. When this day commenced, however, there was
again not a penny in hand. But my eyes were directed to the Lord, and
therefore my heart was at peace; I was fully assured that He would
help this day also. About eleven I was informed that there was 19s.
3d. in hand, being the produce of the boysâ€™ knitting, and that also
some old clothes, given for sale, had been sold for 3s. 6d., and one
Report besides for 3d. To this one of the labourers added 4s. of his
own, and gave a book besides for sale. Thus we had 1l. 7s., which was
enough to meet the demands of this day.

May 26. By the sale of 166 little books which had been given to be
disposed of, by a few shillings which came in for the childrenâ€™s
needlework, by 4s. which had been taken out of the boxes in the
Orphan-Houses, by a little money given by one of the labourers, by
10s. which came anonymously in a letter, and by the sale of some
Reports--we were able to meet the demands since the 22nd. Today there
was 1l. 2s. 8d. left in hand, but this was not quite enough for the
need of the day. In the afternoon came in for needlework 11s. 6d.,
and there was 5s. left at the Infant-Orphan House. Thus we had
enough, and a few shillings left for tomorrow.

May 26. Nothing had come in. My engagements kept me from going to the
Orphan-Houses till seven in the evening, when the labourers met
together for prayer. When we met I found that one of them had given
l7s., which had been divided between the three houses. This, with the
little which had been left yesterday, had procured all necessary
articles. We are now very poor.

May 27. We met for prayer, at eleven this morning. No money had come
in, but there was enough for dinner in all the houses. This morning
the LAST COALS were used in the Infant-Orphan-House, and in the
Boysâ€™-Orphan-House there were ONLY ENOUGH FOR TODAY, and there was no
money in hand to buy more. In this our need T.P.C. sent a load of
coals. How kind of the Lord! A plain proof that not in displeasure,
but only for the trial of our faith we are allowed to be so poor. We
purpose to meet again at four this afternoon. May the Lord graciously
be pleased to send help in the mean time!

Evening. The Lord has had mercy! A person bought some days since
several articles, which had been given to be sold for the benefit of
the Orphans, and owed 6l. 15s. This morning I asked the Lord to
incline his heart to bring the money, or a part of it, as we were in
such need. Just as I was going to meet for prayer with my
fellow-labourers this afternoon, he came and brought 4l. But our kind
Father showed us still further today, that only for the trial of our
faith He had for a season withheld supplies; for there was given this
evening with Eccles. ix. 10, 5l. There came in also 9s. for articles
which had been put into the hand of a sister, who has taken on her
the service of disposing of articles which are given for sale.
Besides this, there were sent two boxes of new clothes, and some
materials for clothes, from sisters in the Lord, residing in Dublin,
which articles are worth several pounds. Thus the day, which had
begun with prayer, ended in praise. But there is one thing more to be
recorded respecting this day, as precious or more so than what has
been said: I was today informed that the Lord has begun to stir up
several of the boys to care about their souls.

May 28. The Lord has kindly sent in further supplies. A clergyman
gave 2l.; and 5s. came in for Reports.

May 29. Today has come in still further 1l. 3s. 2d., and several
trinkets which were sent from Barnstaple.

May 30. I took 1l. out of the box in my house.

May 31. When there was again not a penny in hand, the Lord sent in
2l. 2s.

June 6. This is Saturday. Several pounds were needed, as usual, for
the Orphans; but there was not a penny in hand. In this our great
need F. W., who often has been instrumental in supplying our need,
and who lives many miles from Bristol, sent 5l. There came in 5s.
besides. Thus we are helped to the close of one more week, in which
our faith has been repeatedly tried. In the evening came in further,
by sale of articles, 2l., and a donation of 10s.

June 7. Lordâ€™s day. Today came in 7l. 1s. 3d., to enable us to meet
the necessities of tomorrow.

June 8. This evening eight German Missionary brethren and sisters,
whom I have been for some time expecting, arrived in Bristol, on
their way to the East Indies.

June 9. Again, when only 2s. 3d. was in hand for the Orphans, there
came in from a considerable distance 2l.

June 10 and 11. These two days came in 1l. 0s. 4d., which was enough,
with the little which had been left, to procure what was needed.

June 12. When there was nothing in hand, several articles of
gentlemenâ€™s clothing, all worn, were sent for sale, which, being
disposed of for 1l. 17s., we were helped through this day.

June 13. Todayâ€™s need was met by a box of clothes coming from
Worcester, which contained also 3l. 0s. 2d. There was also 11s. taken
out of the box in my house.

June 15. 2l. 5s. 3d. came in yesterday and today, by which we were
able to meet the necessary demands, and have 5s. left.

June 16. Some articles were sold for 11s., which had been given for
sale. This, with the remaining 5s., met the necessities of the day.

June 17. Only 4s. has come in by childrenâ€™s needlework. This is all
we have, to meet the need of today, except 2s. 6d., which I found in
the box in my house, which our poverty led me to open. Evening. The
Lord has had mercy upon us. A sister, to whom some time since some
money was left, and whom the Lord has made willing to lay it all out
in His service, having received a small part of what is coming to
her, brought 5l. 10s. 6d. of it, this afternoon, for the Orphans.
There came in still further this evening 2l.

For several days past I had been very poor in reference to my own
temporal necessities, as well as in reference to the Orphans. Today
we were especially poor, in both respects; but our kind Father
remembered not merely the need of the dear Orphans, but gave me also
some money for my own personal expenses. The same sister just
referred to, who brought 5l. 10s. 6d. for the Orphans, brought me
also 7l. for myself.

June 18. Today a new coat and waistcoat were given to me, for which I
had repeatedly asked the Lord, as my clothes are now very old. As
surely as I really need any thing, be it in money, or in any other
way, my kind Father supplies the need.

June 19. The Lord has poured in still more abundantly today. A
brother gave me 10l. for myself. Thus, after a season of more than
usual poverty, the Lord sends a more than usual supply. How kind a
Master do I serve!

June 21. Again, when there was not one penny in hand, came in today
6l. 10s. for the Orphans.

June 22. Tomorrow, the Lord willing, I purpose, with my wife, to
accompany the three German brethren and the five German sisters to
Liverpool who purpose to sail from thence. Under these circumstances
it is desirable to leave at least a little money behind. This desire
of my heart the Lord has granted; for this morning D. C. gave me 5l.,
and there came in by sale of articles 10s. 5d. In the evening a
sister, who has left Bristol today, sent me by her mother 5l., having
particularly requested her to let me have the money today, as she
knew that I was going away tomorrow.

This evening we had an especial Missionary prayer meeting, at which
the brethren and sisters were commended to the Lord.

June 23. This morning we left for Liverpool, where we safely arrived
in the evening.

The following extracts give the account of the Lordâ€™s goodness in
supplying the necessities of the Orphans, while I was away from
Bristol.

On June 25, whilst at Liverpool, I received a letter from brother R.
B., master at the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, dated Bristol, June 24th, in
which he writes thus:--The money which you left behind, with 1s. 6d.
which came in for Reports, supplied the necessities of yesterday and
today; but there is nothing in hand to meet the necessities of
tomorrow. Our hope is in God, assuredly believing that He will, as in
former times, help us in His own time and manner."--

Two days afterwards the following letter came.

"Bristol, June 26, 1840.

"Dear Brother,--Since I wrote to you we have very sweetly proved the
mercy and truth of our heavenly Father, When my letter left Bristol,
we had not one penny in hand. On the same evening sister gave me a
parcel containing 1l. 1s., the produce of the sale of an article.
This was sufficient for yesterday. But after this we were again
penniless. I went to the meeting in the evening, where brother J. B.
gave me a list of names of persons who had given to him for the
Orphans, to the amount of 1l. 4s. 1d. I afterwards sold one of your
books, one of brother Craikâ€™s Renderings, and a Report. I also
remembered that a few days before 2s. 6d. had been given to me which
I had forgotten to use. We therefore had in all 1l. 11s. 7d., which
is sufficient to meet this dayâ€™s necessities. I have just received a
sovereign for the Orphans, and besides this a box, containing various
articles of clothes which has been sent from Wales, part of which
articles are only fit for sale. Thus we have something for tomorrow,
if needed.

"Your affectionate brother,

â€˜â€˜R. B,â€™â€™



The arrival of the box of clothes, etc., was announced to me in an
affectionate letter from a brother in Wales, who sent them, but whom
I do not know personally. What follows will show how seasonably the
donation came. On June 30th I received another letter from brother
B., dated Bristol, June 29th, 1840, in which he writes "I should have
posted my letter by one oâ€™clock, but delayed until it was too late,
hoping that I might have to speak of the Lordâ€™s goodness as well as
of our poverty. Thank God, my hopes have been realized!-â€”Besides the
1l. mentioned in my last letter, in the evening of the 26th 11s. 3d.
came in for needlework, and 5s. was given. On Saturday I sold some of
the clothes which had been sent from Wales for 1l., and 5s. was given
to me for an article which had been sold some time ago. As this was
scarcely sufficient, I opened the boxes, and found 3s. 2d. in them.
The whole, therefore, which was in hand, amounted to 3l. 4s. 5d.,
which was enough for Saturday the 27th. This morning, Monday, as
nothing had been given to me since Saturday, there were no means to
provide for the dinner in the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House; but one of the
sisters, having a little money of her own, purchased potatoes and
meat with it. At eleven oâ€™clock we met for prayer. The baker came to
the Infant-Orphan-House, but no bread was taken. A brother left two
quarterns of bread at the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, as a gift. Soon after I
received 1l. through sister L. G., which, as soon as I received, I
began to write to you. It was a comfort to me, in our poverty, that
you still, united in spirit, prayed with us, although distance
separated us in body. I do not know that I ever felt more powerfully
the kindness of our Heavenly Father, than when I received this last
mentioned 1l. Although we are still poor, and soon shall be again in
need, yet, receiving it just at this time, it was very refreshing."

The next day I received the following report about the Orphan-Houses
from brother B., dated June 30th.--" According to your request,
tomorrow only is the time for me to write, but as the Lord has dealt
very bountifully with us, I write today, in order that you may be
refreshed by the account thereof. Yesterday afternoon, I received
16s., and this morning I sold some more of the articles sent from
Wales, for 8s. 6d., which meets this dayâ€™s demands."

On July 2nd I accompanied the eight German brethren and sisters to
the vessel. Just before they went on board, brother ----, one of the
missionary brethren, gave me 6l. 10s. for the Orphans. He had sold
his plate while at Bristol, considering that as a servant of Jesus
Christ, and as one who desired to preach Jesus to the poor Hindoos,
he needed it not, This money was the produce of it, except about 2l.,
which he had spent in purchasing a few books. In giving it to me
said, "The money which we have in the common stock, (being altogether
20l. for the eight) is enough for us. For some months, while we are
on board, we need no money at all, whilst you may lay it out; and
when we need more, the Lord will again supply our need. The other
brethren and sisters have no money of their own, and I desire
likewise to have none, The Lord has laid the Orphans particularly on
my heart, and therefore you must not refuse to accept it."--This
brother little knew how on that very day I had been repeatedly asking
the Lord for means. Truly this was one of the most remarkable ways of
obtaining money, as it came from a poor German missionary, who, in
dependence upon the Lord for his temporal supplies, went to the East
Indies. I sent off at once 5l. of this money to Bristol. The next
day, July 3, I received at Liverpool the following letter from
brother B., dated Bristol, July 2nd.--" Since I last wrote, we have
still found that the Lord is faithful to His word. May we never be
unfaithful towards Him! On Tuesday evening, June 30th, sister C.
brought 11s. 6d. for some articles she sold, and I had received 1s.
6d. for Reports. This, with 8s. that had been put into the boxes, met
the absolute necessities of yesterday, Wednesday. As nothing has been
given since Tuesday, we are, today, Thursday, very needy. I sold the
books I mentioned as being sent, with some others which one of the
sisters in the Orphan-Houses gave of her own, for 7s., which bought
that which was needful for dinner; but there is no money to take in
bread nor milk for one of the houses. We met for prayer. Our hope is
in God, trusting that He who has so often helped us in poverty, will
still do so. If I write any more I shall be too late to post this
letter."

[On my return to Bristol I found, which is not mentioned in the next
letter, that the milk was purchased with the money of one of the
sisters in the Orphan-Houses.]

On July 4th I received the following letter from Bristol, dated July
3rd.

"My dear Brother,--The last account I sent you left us in the greatest
poverty. We had sufficient, it is true, for the time then present;
but there was no money to take in bread with. In the afternoon there
was an old riding habit sent for the Orphans, which I sold this
morning for 7s. I also sold a few books for 5s., two old silver
thimbles and a ring for 1s. 6d.; besides this, 1s. 6d. was sent for
Reports; making in all 15s. This purchased dinner for the three
houses. At twelve oâ€™clock we met for prayer. We were indeed in great
need. There was no money either for bread or milk. The coals in all
the three houses were used, and in every other respect the stores
were in a low state. We had really wanted nothing, but there was
scarcely any thing left. Well, while we were in prayer to God, your
letter came. One of the sisters opened the door and received it, and
after prayer it was given to me. You will be able to conceive the
greatness of our joy, on opening it, and finding it to contain 5l. I
cannot express how much I felt. During the trial I had been much
comforted by the Lordâ€™s sending a little token of his love every day.
It just proved that He was mindful of us in our poverty, and that
when His time was come, He would send us an abundance. I think we all
felt your absence a little, although not cast down on that account.
Money is very precious to those who, like us, so evidently see the
HAND and HEART of our Heavenly Father in bestowing it, The sisters
send their love to you.

"Your affectionate brother,

"R. B."



On July 6th I received the following account from Bristol, dated July
5th. "You are, I am sure, often praying for us, and therefore see, in
the help we receive, Godâ€™s gracious answers to your prayers, and
therefore you will be refreshed by hearing the account of how matters
are with us. On Saturday there was again a little money needed in the
Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, for butter and such little articles; but I had
none in hand, wherewith to supply this need, until nearly tea time,
when 5s. was given to me. In the evening of the same day, at ten
oâ€™clock, 10s. was sent through brother J. S. You will see that we are
still cast simply on God for the future, without anything to depend
on but Himself; and on whom, or on what should children depend, but
on their most kind Father."

On July 8th, whilst still detained in the Lordâ€™s service at
Liverpool, I received from a brother 10l. for the Orphans, which I
sent off at once. On the same day, after I had sent off the money, I
received the following letter from Bristol, dated July 7.

"The Lord is still pleased to keep us very low. Only 4s. 2d. in money
has come in since last I wrote to you. The 10s. I told you of, and
this 4s. 2d., I divided among the sisters. But as this was far from
being sufficient, and knowing that you had received 6l. 10s. and only
sent 5l., I took out of the other funds 1l. 6s. 6d., being all that I
could spare, and divided it also. I would not have done so, had it
not been needful, and had it not appeared to me that we were not
going out of the path of obedience in doing this. There was a sack of
flour sent this morning. We are still, we may say, in need, as even
the money, which I have divided, was not enough to purchase every
thing desirable to have."

On July 11th, whilst at Worcester, I received the following letter,
dated Bristol, July 9.

"After writing to you the last time, I got no more money on that day,
except 1s. The next day, Wednesday, I received 2s. 6d., and took 2s.
out of the box in the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House. Also a sister purchased a
Bible, and out of that money I took 3s. 6d. to make up the 30s., to
which I alluded in my last letter. This carried us through the day.
In the evening of the same day I received 11s. 3d. and 2s., which
purchased meat for dinner; and the potatoes in the boysâ€™ garden,
being now fit for use, we had for dinner. After the dinner was
provided we received the 10l. from you, which enabled the sisters
again to replenish their stock. Out of the 10l. I kept the 30s., in
case I might need it on Saturday for the salaries of the masters and
governesses of the Day Schools. We felt the poverty a little more, I
think, on account of your absence. I knew the Lord would help, but
still I felt tried in some measure. The Lord, by His grace, reproves
our waywardness towards Him.

When this letter arrived, there was sent to me, at the same time,
from Bristol, 5l. for the Orphans, which I sent off at once. On July
17th I returned to Bristol.

I add a few more words respecting my stay at Liverpool.

--About October 1837 I sent some Bibles and 46 copies of my Narrative
to a brother in Upper Canada, who, in dependence upon the Lord for
temporal supplies, is labouring as a missionary in that country.
About eighteen months afterwards I heard, that this box had not
arrived. I then wrote to the shipbroker at Liverpool, (who as agent
had to send it to America, and to whom I had paid his commission and
the freight), to make inquiry about the box; but I received no
answer. About a month afterwards my letter was returned to me,
through the Dead-Letter Office, and it was stated on the outside that
the individual had left Liverpool, and no one knew where he was gone.
Putting all these things together, I had now full reason to think
that the broker had, never sent off the box. My comfort, however,
was, that though this poor sinner had acted thus, yet the Lord, in
His own place and way, would use the Bibles and my Narratives. Now,
almost immediately after my arrival in Liverpool, a brother told me,
that several persons wished to hear me preach who had read my
Narrative; and that he knew a considerable number had been bought by
a brother, a bookseller, from pawnbrokers, and sold again; and that
some also had been ordered from London when there were no more to be
had otherwise. It was thus evident that the shipbroker pawned these
Narratives before he absconded; but the Lord used them as I had
hoped.--I preached ten times in English and once in German whilst at
Liverpool, and I know that several persons were brought to hear me,
through having read my Narrative.--The German brethren preached twice
in German, there being several German vessels in the port, and a
number of German sugar refiners living at Liverpool. Liverpool seems
to me especially a place where a brother, who is familiar with French
and German, may find an abundance of work among the German and French
sailors, in the way of preaching to them, and in the way of
distributing French and German Bibles and Tracts.--One of the German
missionary brethren found out a brother in the Lord, a native of the
same town in Prussia, from whence he himself comes, who repeatedly
met with us. This dear sailor was the only believer in the vessel in
which he was, and has had to suffer much for the Lordâ€™s sake.--When
the German brethren and sisters were going on board, I engaged a fly
for the purpose of taking all their small luggage. When the man put
the luggage into the fly, I was struck by its having a hind boot,
which I had never seen before in any fly, which he opened, and into
which he put several carpet bags. There were seventeen packages
altogether. When we arrived at the vessel it was just on the point of
going into the river, with several other vessels, and there were
crowds of people standing at the docks. The flyman took out the
luggage and was on the point of leaving, when I asked him whether he
had taken out all the luggage, which I had not been able to count,
because of the pressure of people, and the rapidity with which the
packages were taken to the vessel. His reply was, Yes. But all at
once, by the good hand of God, I remembered the hind boot, and I
asked him to open it. The man, somewhat confused, opened it, and in
it were five or six carpet bags. This thing showed me afresh our
entire dependence upon the Lord, step by step. I was alone. The crowd
was great. The vessel was on the point of sailing: and all without my
fault or the fault of any one; but it was so through unforseen
circumstances. One minute later, and the bags, in all human
probability, would have been lost. For when the brethren had missed
their luggage, it would have been too late; for though I had marked
the number of the fly when I engaged it, yet that would have profited
nothing, when once the brethren were at sea. But the hand of God was
for good upon these His children, whose stock of linen was only such
as they would need. Such a circumstance should teach one to make the
very smallest affairs a subject of prayer; for instance, That all the
luggage might be safely taken out of a fly.

On July 10th my wife and I left Liverpool, where we had experienced
much kindness, for Worcester, where we stayed a few days, and had
again much love shown to us by the saints there.

July 25. Since July 11th the Lord has kindly sent in the supplies for
the Orphans, so that we have had always something coming in, before
the last which was in hand was spent. Now, today, having paid out
this morning 8l. 5s., again nothing was left in hand, when in the
afternoon 3l. came in by sale of articles.

July 26. Lordâ€™s-day. As I had no opportunity today of preaching in
our chapels (there being two brethren ministering among us who are
strangers in Bristol), I have preached twice this evening in the open
air. Precious as this work is, yet I am sure it is not that to which
I am called for a constancy, as I have no strength of body for it.
But I have seen afresh this evening how greatly it is needed. The
second time I preached, I took my stand in a court, filled with poor
people, almost every one of whom was dirty, though it was the Lordâ€™s
day evening. A woman readily lent me a chair on which I stood, and
could thus be heard by the people in the houses behind and before me,
and on my right and left hand. Judging from their dirty appearance, I
should not suppose any of these poor people had been any where, to
hear the Gospel preached throughout the day. How plenteous is the
harvest, and how few are the labourers! Lord of the harvest, send
Thou, in compassion to poor sinners, more labourers into the harvest!
--How well a brother who has some gift, and a measure of strength of
lungs, might employ a part of the Lordâ€™s days, or of other days,
either by reading the Scriptures from house to house to such persons,
and making some remarks on them; or by standing up in a court and
reading the Scriptures aloud and speaking on them. It is very rarely
that one meets with decided opposition on these occasions; at least I
have generally in such cases found far more readiness to listen, than
decidedly to oppose.

Aug. 1. A few days since a brother was staying with me, on his way to
his father, whom he had not seen for above two years, and who was
greatly opposed to him, on account of the decided steps which his son
had taken for the Lord. Before this brother left, that precious
promise of our Lord was brought to my mind: "If two of you shall
agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be
done for them of my Father which is in heaven." Matt. xviii. 19.
Accordingly, I went to the brotherâ€™s room, and having agreed to pray
about a kind reception from his father, and the conversion of both
parents, we prayed together.--Today this brother returned. The Lord
has answered already one part of the prayer. The brother was most
kindly received, contrary to all natural expectation. May the Lord
now help us both to look for an answer to the other part of our
prayer! There is nothing too hard for the Lord!

Since the publication of the third edition, the father of this
brother died. He lived above ten years after Aug. 1, 1840, until he
was above 86 years of age; and as he continued a life of much sin and
opposition to the truth, the prospect with reference to his
conversion became darker and darker. But at last the Lord answered
prayer. This aged sinner was entirely changed, simply rested on the
Lord Jesus for the salvation of his soul, and became as much attached
to his believing son, as before he had been opposed to him; and
wished to have him about him as much as possible, that he might read
the Holy Scriptures to him and pray with him. Let this instance
encourage believers, who have unbelieving parents, to continue in
prayer for them.

Since the publication of the fourth edition, the mother also died.
About sixteen years had elapsed, after her son and I had thus prayed
together, before, in her case, the answer was granted; yet she, too,
at last, in very advanced years, was brought to trust in the Lord
Jesus alone for the salvation of her soul.--I distinctly remember,
with what full assurance, that the Lord would answer our united
supplication, I went to the room of this brother, to propose prayer,
resting upon the promise in Matt. xviii. 19, though the case appeared
to be most hopeless.

Aug. 6. Yesterday I was led, by the sense of our necessity, and the
knowledge of the Fatherâ€™s heart, like Elijah, to go again and again
to Him with my request for help, as there was nothing in hand for the
Orphans to supply the necessities of today. Last evening, after the
meeting, a brother from Oxford gave me a sovereign for the Orphans;
by two other individuals was sent half-a-crown; and by the sale of an
article, which had been given many weeks since, but was only disposed
of today, came in 5s.: thus, in all, the Lord sent again 1l. 7s. 6d.
This morning I heard that 10s. was given yesterday to brother B., so
that we were able to meet the demands of today, which are 1l. 15s.

Aug. 7. As there was only 2s. 6d. in hand, I asked the Lord
repeatedly yesterday to send us what was needed for today. When I
came home last evening from the meeting, 5l. was given to me, which
Q. Q. had brought while I was away, to be used as I thought well.
This I took for the Orphans, which will supply our need for today and
tomorrow.

Aug. 8. Saturday. This evening I was meditating on the 4th Psalm. The
words in verse 3: "But know that the Lord hath set apart him that is
godly for Himself; the Lord will hear when I call upon Him," I was
enabled to apply to myself, and they led me to prayer for spiritual
blessings. Whilst in prayer, the need of the Orphans (there being now
again not one penny in hand), was also brought to my mind, and I
asked the Lord respecting this likewise. ABOUT FIVE MINUTES
AFTERWARDS I was informed that a sister wished to see me. She brought
1l. 10s. for the Orphans. Thus the Lord has already kindly sent a
little to begin the week with. There was also still further given
today, 1s. 11d.; and 5s. 1d. was taken out of the boxes in the
Orphan-Houses.

Aug. 10. Monday. The 1l. 17s. which came in on Saturday evening for
the Orphans, was not enough for the necessities of today, as 2l. l5s.
was required. About noon, the Lord gave through a brother in Bath,
who has a relative in one of the Orphan-Houses, 1l. 10s. more, so
that we had enough, and a few shillings left. This evening came in
4s. besides, also 15s. 6d. by sale of articles.

Aug. 11. The money which was in hand, with 3s. which was given by one
of the labourers, as there was not enough otherwise, helped us
through this day.

Aug. 12. One of the labourers gave today 10s. of his own, as nothing
had come in. Yet this would not have been sufficient, had there not
been sold two pairs of stockings, which had been knitted by the boys,
for 4s. 1d., and had not 5s. been found in one of the boxes.

Aug. 13. Yesterday there was given a collection of shells, which was
sold today, and supplied the necessities of this day, with an
addition of 10s. which a brother gave last evening, and 4s. which was
taken out of the box in the Infant-Orphan-House.

Aug. 14. There was nothing at all in hand. I opened the box in my
house, and found 1s. 4d. in it, A labourer gave 4s. of his own. There
was found 1s, 6d. in the boxes in the Orphan-Houses, and 5s. came in
by the sale of a few articles which had been given for that purpose.
By this 11s. 10d, we were able to meet the absolute need, but were
able to take in only a small quantity of bread.

Aug. 15. There was today the greatest poverty in all the three
houses; all the stores were very low, as the income throughout the
week had been so small. In addition to this it was Saturday, when the
wants are nearly double in comparison with other days. At least 3l.
was needed to help us comfortably through the day; but there was
nothing towards this in hand. My only hope was in God.

The very necessity led me to expect help for this day; for if none
had come, the Lordâ€™s name would have been dishonoured. Between twelve
and one two sisters in the Lord called on me, and the one gave me 2l.
and the other 7s. 6d. for the Orphans. With this I went to the
Boysâ€™-Orphan-House about one oâ€™clock, where I found the children at
dinner. Brother B. put the following note into my hand, which he was
just going to send off:

"Dear Brother,--With potatoes from the childrenâ€™s garden, and with
apples from the tree in the play-ground (which apples were used for
apple dumplings), and 4s. 6d. the price of some articles given by one
of the labourers, we have a dinner. There is much needed. But the
Lord has provided and will provide."

There came in still further this day by sale of Reports, 1s., by the
box in the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, 1s., by childrenâ€™s needlework, 6s.
6d., by a donation of one of the sisters in the Orphan-Houses, 6s.
Thus we had this day 3l. 6s. 6d. to meet all necessities, and are
brought to the close of another week.

Aug. 16. Lordâ€™s-day. There came in still further last evening, 3s. by
sale of some articles, and today 2s. was given, and 5l.; so that the
Lord in His love and faithfulness has given us what we are likely to
need tomorrow and the day after.

Aug. 17. There has come in still further 2l.

Aug. 18. This morning a brother who passed through Bristol gave 1l.,
saying that it had been especially laid on his heart to do so. Thus
the Lord has provided a little towards tomorrow. Besides this came in
today 1s. 9d.

Aug. 19. By the sale of three pairs of stockings came in 5s. 6d., and
from Liverpool was sent 12s. 6d.: this, with what was in hand, was
enough for today, and left a little over.

Aug. 20. Today there was not enough money in hand to meet all the
demands; but it being known that yesterday several persons had put
money into the boxes in the Orphan-Houses, they were opened, and
found to contain 1l. 4s. 6d., which was more than sufficient.

I would call upon the believing reader to admire the love and wisdom
and power of God in ordering it so that persons should come to the
Orphan-Houses just at the time when there is temporal pressure, and
should be influenced to put money into the boxes. These little sums
have been often the means of helping us in our greatest need. The
especial providence of God, as in every other respect, so in this
particular point also, is to be seen respecting this Institution, in
that so much is anonymously put into the boxes; for there has been no
less than 45l. 18s. 9 3/4d, put in during the last two years, from
Dec. 10, 1838, to Dec. 10, 1840.

Aug. 22. Saturday. Yesterday there was only 13s. 6d. in hand, which
was enough to meet the necessities of the day, but not sufficient to
enable us to take in the usual quantity of bread. This morning we
were in much need, not only because there were no means for procuring
dinner in the Boysâ€™ and Girlsâ€™-Orphan-Houses, but also because, this
being Saturday, we had to procure provisions for two days. When
brother B. went to the Infant-Orphan-House, to make inquiry about the
demands for today, he was informed that money had been put into the
box there, which was found to be 12s. There came in also in the
morning 10s, besides. This 1l. 2s. was more than sufficient to
purchase all that was needed for dinner. Between twelve and one
oâ€™clock there arrived a parcel from Clapham, which contained several
donations for the Orphans, amounting to 2l. l5s., besides a pair of
sheets and pillow cases, 4 frocks, 4 handkerchiefs, 4 caps, 1 stuff
petticoat, 2 chemises, 6 bags, 1 little shirt, (all new), and several
yards of prints and calico. In the evening came a box from Worcester,
which contained the following articles for sale: a valuable veil, 2
silver ladles, a silver fork, 2 pairs of new plated candlesticks, a
fan, and 2 Italian books. There came also from the neighbourhood of
Wolverhampton, 2s. 6d. and seven books. Thus the Lord helped us
through this day also, at the commencement of which we were so very
poor, and needed several pounds.

Aug. 23. Lordâ€™s-day. As we have often found it to be the case, so it
is again now. After the Lord has tried our faith, He, in the love of
His heart, gives us an abundance, to show that not in anger, but for
the glory of His name, and for the trial of our faith He has allowed
us to be poor. This morning I received from an aged and afflicted
servant, 3l.; and a little afterwards 8l. from Q. Q. From another
servant 5s.; also 2s. was put anonymously into the box at Bethesda,
besides the 1l. 10s. for rent. Thus the Lord has kindly given today
12l. 17s.

Aug. 29. Saturday. Since last Monday had come in only 2l. by the
profits of the sale of ladiesâ€™ baskets, 1l. l4s. 10d. by sale of
articles, 3s. as two donations, and 6d. by Reports. Thus it happened
that when this day began, though a Saturday, we had only 7s. in hand.
In the course of the morning came in 11s. 9d., and towards the
evening 8s. 6d. This day we have been as poor in regard to our
stores, as at any time. During the whole of this day, though
Saturday, we had only 1l. 7s. 3d, On this account we had to buy a
smaller quantity of bread than usual, etc.; nevertheless the children
have even this day lacked nothing, and there is a sufficient quantity
of wholesome food till breakfast on Monday morning.

For many weeks past very little has come in for the other funds. The
chief supply has been by the sale of Bibles. Last Saturday I was not
able to pay the whole of the weekly salaries of the teachers in the
Day Schools, which, however, does not make me a debtor to them, as it
is an understood thing, that they have not to look to me for payment,
but to the Lord. Today again only 2s. was in hand, whilst several
pounds were needed to pay the salaries. It appeared now plainly to be
the will of the Lord that, as all the labourers in the Orphan-Houses
know about the state of the funds, so the brethren and sisters who
labour in the Day Schools should share the trial of faith and the joy
of faith with us. Accordingly we all met, and after I had laid on
their hearts, the importance of keeping to themselves, for the Lordâ€™s
sake, the state of the funds, we prayed together.

Aug. 30. Lordâ€™s day. Today the Lord has again bountifully opened His
hand for the Orphans. There came in with Ecclesiastes ix. 10, 5l.;
from a sister, a servant, 10s.; and for rent 1l. 10s. Besides this,
was anonymously put into the box at Bethesda, 10s. 3d. and 2s. 6d.

Sept. 1. Though there was a good supply given to the matrons
yesterday, yet, as the stock of provisions had been so low on
Saturday, the money was all spent by last evening; and had the Lord
not kindly sent in yesterday 14s., and today 1l. 10s., we should have
been again in need.

Sept. 4. The day before yesterday, Sept. 2, came a box from Leeds,
from sisters in the Lord whom we have never seen, and of whom until
now we have never heard, but on whose hearts the Lord has laid His
work in our hands. The box contained a variety of articles, to be
sold for the benefit of the Orphans. No money has come in the last
two days, except 1s. which was given, and 5s. for things sold. On
this account the boxes in the Orphan-Houses were opened, but only 1s.
7 1/2d. was found in them. To supply what was needed today, an
article which came in the box from Leeds was sold for 5s. and thus we
were helped through the day. The sisters who sent the box from Leeds
wrote to us a most affectionate letter, in which they announced this
and another box which is to follow, stating how much the Lord had
laid the work in our hand on their hearts. They may have little
thought, when they sent off the box, that so soon the produce of one
of the articles sent by them would supply our need.

Sept. 5. Saturday. Because there had come in so little during the
last days, at least 3l. was requisite to supply the need of today.
There was, however, not one penny in hand when the day commenced.
Last evening the labourers in the Orphan-Houses, together with the
teachers of the Day Schools, met for prayer. This morning one of the
teachers, who had a little money of his own, brought 1l. 5s. 6d.
Thus, as we had hoped, we were enabled to provide for the dinner. In
the afternoon all of us met again for prayer. Another teacher of the
Day Schools gave 2s, 6d, and 1s. came in besides. But all this was
not enough. There was no dinner provided for tomorrow, nor was there
any money to take in milk tomorrow, and besides this a number of
other little things were to be purchased, that there might be no real
want of anything. Now observe how our kind father helped us! Between
seven and eight this evening a sister, whose heart the Lord has made
willing to take on her the service of disposing of the articles which
are sent for sale, brought 2l. 10s. 6d. for some of the things which
came a fortnight ago from Worcester, and last Wednesday from Leeds.
The sister stated, that though she did not feel at all well, she had
come because she had it so laid on her heart, that she could not stay
away. Our Father knew our need, and therefore, though so late, He
sent this help. Thus we were richly provided with all we needed this
Saturday.

Sept. 6. The Lord has kindly sent in today for the Orphans 4l. 5s.
6d. for the need of tomorrow. One pound of this money was given by a
servant, who has again and again given of late, and who has thus
again and again been the means of supplying our need, when there was
either nothing at all, or not sufficient in hand. When she gave me
the money to-night, she told me that of late she had had the Orphans
particularly laid on her heart. 1l. 3s. was the produce of an
orphan-box, which a sister was led so seasonably to send just now.

Sept. 7. This morning a brother from Barnstaple, who came on Saturday
evening (that evening when we were so greatly tried, but so
graciously delivered), gave me 1l. 0s. 3d., which the love of some
saints at Barnstaple had sent for the Orphans, besides 5s. of his
own. We have thus enough for today and tomorrow. There came in still
further today, 6s. 6d.

Sept. 8. How kindly has the Lord so ordered it that for some time
past the income for the school-fund should have been so little, in
order that thus we might be constrained to let the labourers in the
Day Schools share our joys and our trials of faith, which had been
before kept from them! But as above two years ago the Lord ordered it
so that it became needful to communicate to the labourers in the
Orphan-Houses the state of the funds, and made it a blessing to them,
so that I am now able to leave Bristol, and yet the work goes on, so,
I doubt not, the brethren and sisters who are teachers in the Day
Schools will be greatly blessed by being thus partakers of our
precious secret respecting the state of the funds. Our prayer
meetings have already been a blessing to us, and united us more than
ever in the work. We have them now every morning at seven, and we
shall continue them, the Lord helping us, till we see His hand
stretched forth, not merely in giving us means for the teachers, but
also for other purposes; for we need a stove in one of the school
rooms, a fresh supply of several kinds of Bibles and New Testaments,
and it is desirable to have means to help Missionary brethren who
labour in dependence upon the Lord for the supply of their temporal
necessities.

Sept. 9. We are now meeting every morning at seven for prayer. With
5s. which was sent yesterday from the Isle of Wight for the Orphans,
we have commenced the day; but I believe that the Lord will help us
through this day also.

Evening. About twelve this morning a brother, a stranger, who is
staying at Ashton, near Bristol, came with some of his family to the
Orphan-Houses. While brother B. was for a few moments out of the room
to fetch a key, the visiting brother took the opportunity of secretly
putting something into the box at the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House. Brother B.,
however, perceived it before he could get away from the box, and, the
brother being gone, our great need brought it out, when it was found
to be 5l. Thus the Lord kindly has provided for the need of today and
tomorrow. When this money was given we were exceedingly poor. For not
only would there have been no means to take in the usual quantity of
bread in one of the houses, but there was no money to take in milk in
the afternoon in any of the houses. The Lord knew our need, and
therefore just now sent this brother. He gave also 2s, for Reports.

Sept. 10. When now the 5l. of yesterday was again spent, the Lord has
kindly sent another 5l. There came in still further 6s. 10d.

Yesterday came in it. 7s., and today 1l. 15s. 10d. for the other
funds. Thus the Lord, in answer to our petitions at the morning
prayer meetings, has sent in a little for these funds also.

Sept. 11. The Lord has sent in still further and more richly for the
Orphans. This morning 1l. was given to me which had been sent from
Trowbridge, and this afternoon a brother who came from Scotland gave
me 10l., and brought the following trinkets which were sent by a lady
from Scotland:--2 clasps, a ring, 2 pairs of ear-rings, a slide, a
pin, a cross, and 2 bracelets, all of gold. In the afternoon came in
3l. by sale of articles.

Sept. 12. The Lord has sent in still more. This morning was sent 10l.
through a banker in London, by the order of a sister at Worcester;
and 10s. was put into the box at my house. This has been a week of
peculiar mercies, as above 40l. has been sent in, besides several
articles. We have continued to meet for prayer every morning, from
seven to eight.

Sept. 13. Today came in 3l. 8s. 4d.,of which 1l. 10s. 6d. was for some
of the articles sent from Leeds.

Sept. 16. Though during the last week above 40l. came in, yet,
because the usual expenses for housekeeping were about 15l., and
because most of the sisters who labour in the Orphan-Houses had not
had for a long time any money for their own personal necessities, we
were the day before yesterday again so poor, that only a few
shillings were left. The Lord, knowing this, sent in a little money,
and, by a sister from the Isle of Wight, 7 rings, 2 brooches, 2 pins,
1 pair of ear-rings, 2 pairs of studs, all of gold, 2 chemises, and 2
babiesâ€™ shirts. Today arrived from Leeds, from two sisters in the
Lord before referred to, a second box, the first having come about a
fortnight ago. This second box contained the following articles:--2
silver dessert spoons, a pair of silver sugar tongs, a silver tea
caddy spoon, 6 plated forks, 4 knife resters, a cream spoon, 6
Britannia metal tea spoons, a silver watch, a metal watch, a small
telescope, 2 cloak fastenings, 11 pencils, a pen case with pieces of
sealing wax, 2 pairs of scissors, 6 chimney ornaments, a boa ring, a
chess board, 3 purses with 2l. 1s. 4d., 2 silver pocket knives, a
silver pencil case, a ditto of brass, a bodkin case, a gold pin, a
silver vinaigrette, 125 needles, 1 memorandum case, 5 paper baskets,
18 books, 100 copies of a small English Grammar (unbound), 75
pamphlets, 37 table mats, 120 little tracts, 5 pairs of stockings, 2
pairs of socks, a Thibet shawl, 6 coloured frocks, 4 caps, 9 collars,
8 neckerchiefs, 3 muslin aprons, 5 holland aprons, 4 muslin frocks, 6
babiesâ€™ ditto, 2 white gowns, 2 remnants of print, 5 habit shirts, a
bonnet, a merino apron, a glass trumpet, a taper candlestick, several
small pieces of riband and gauze, 4 yards of silk fringe, 7 cases of
different kinds of cards, a crape scarf, some lining calico, 13
little boxes, a straw basket, and about 50 other various little
articles. It is difficult to describe the peculiar pleasure which I
had in unpacking the box, and in finding that all these articles were
for the Lordâ€™s work.--There came in still further this evening 8s.

Besides other small donations since the 10th, there came into day 5l.
for the other funds, as the answer to oft-repeated prayer; also, from
Liverpool, 1l. l4s. 8d. Thus the Lord encourages our hearts in this
part of the work likewise.

Sept. 17. The need of today for the Orphans was supplied by the
little which had come in yesterday, and by the 2l. 1s. 4d. which came
in the second box from Leeds. These two boxes from Leeds have been
sent most seasonably by the Lord, and thus truly the sisters who sent
them have been led by Him to do so, according to what they wrote in a
letter, which announced the arrival of the first box; "We feel deeply
interested in your concerns, and our anxiety to serve you has
increased by every new discovery of the kindness and goodness of God,
in providing for your wants. Indeed, we cannot but believe that the
Lord has put it into our hearts to help you, and we trust you will
honour us, His unworthy servants, by believing that our gift is
really His." There came in today 2l. 16s. by the sale of some of the
articles sent in the first box from Leeds, and by the sale of some
other articles. Thus our need for tomorrow is supplied.

Sept. 18. Today the Lord has sent again 17s. 5d. by sale of some of
the articles sent from Leeds, and 2l. 10s. from Leicestershire, and
also 4s. for childrenâ€™s needlework. Thus we had enough for tomorrow,
being Saturday.

Sept. 21. Monday. By what was in hand for the Orphans, and by what
had come in yesterday, the need of today is more than supplied, as
there is enough for tomorrow also.

Today a brother from the neighbourhood of London gave me 10l., to be
laid out as it might be most needed. we have been praying many days
for the School-Bibleâ€”and Missionary Funds, I took it all for them.
This brother knew nothing about our work, when he came three days
since to Bristol. Thus the Lord, to show His continued care over us,
raises up new helpers. They that trust in the Lord shall never be
confounded! Some who helped for a while may fall asleep in Jesus;
others may grow cold in the service of the Lord; others may be as
desirous as ever to help, but have no longer the means; others may
have both a willing heart to help, and have also the means, but may
see it the Lordâ€™s will to lay them out in another way;--and thus, from
one cause or another, were we to lean upon man, we should surely be
confounded; but, in leaning upon the living God alone, We are BEYOND
disappointment, and BEYOND being forsaken because of death, or want
of means, or want of love, or because of the claims of other work.
How precious to have learned in any measure to stand with God alone
in the world, and yet to be happy, and to know that surely no good
thing shall be withheld from us whilst we walk uprightly!

Sept. 23. This morning there was again only 10s. in hand for the
Orphans. As this was not enough for the day, I opened the box in my
house, in which I found 8s. 6d. The boxes in the Orphan-Houses were
also opened, which contained 7s. 6 1/2d. There came in also by the
sale of a pair of stockings, 1s. 6d. This 1l., 7s. 6 1/2d. was
enough, and even 3s. more than was absolutely needed. The Lord gave
today another proof that He is still mindful of us, for a brother
sent half a ton of coals to each of the three houses.

Sept. 24. Yesterday our prayer, in our meeting at twelve oâ€™clock, was
especially for the supply of today. I was fully assured that the Lord
would send help, as now all our stores were again exhausted.
Accordingly, last evening a sister, into whose hands some of the
articles, which came in the second box from Leeds, had been put for
sale, gave me 1l. 3s. 7d., being the payment for some of them. There
came in a donation of 2s. besides. This 1l. 5s. 7d. served for this
day. The Lord be praised who has helped us thus!

Sept. 25. It is now half-past eleven. Nothing has come in as yet. How
the Lord will help us through the day is not my care; for sure I am
He will help. I am just going to meet with my fellow-labourers for
prayer. Perhaps the Lord will again, at the time of the meeting, fill
our mouths with praise, as He has done so many times. My soul waits
on Him for deliverance! How truly precious to have such a Father as
we have!

Sept. 26. When I went yesterday to the meeting for prayer, I found
that some articles, which had come from Leeds, had been sold for 10s.
9d., and that 2s. 6d. had been taken out of the box in the
Girlsâ€™-Orphan-Ho use. To this one of the labourers added 10s. of his
own. This 1l. 3s. 3d. supplied all we needed yesterday; but there was
now again nothing in hand to meet this dayâ€™s demands, which I knew
would be great, on account of its being Saturday. The Lord, however,
remembered our Saturdayâ€™s necessities, and therefore sent in
abundantly, so that we had even more than we needed for today, though
we required no less than 5l. The way in which He kindly helped us,
was this: first, 3l. came in for articles which had been sent from
Leeds; afterwards a little boy and girl brought two little Savingsâ€™
Banks, filled with their little presents, amounting altogether to
15s l 1/4d. In the evening came in still further 4l. for articles
which had been sold, most of which had likewise been sent from Leeds.
Thus the Lord sent in altogether 8l. l8s. l 1/4d. in the course of
the day, whilst it commenced without there being a penny in hand.

Sept. 27. Today the Lord has sent in still further 2l. 5s. 8d., of
which 15s. 8d. was for articles sent from Leeds, and 1l. with
Ecclesiastes ix. 10.

Sept. 29. Yesterday we were again penniless, after the necessities of
the three houses had been supplied. Almost immediately afterwards
came in 1l. l2s. 2d., sufficient to supply the need of today.

Sept. 30. Today there is nothing in hand. It is now a quarter past
eleven, but nothing yet has come in. Nevertheless the Lord will
surely help us this day also! About five minutes after I had written
the above, I was informed by a note from brother B., that 2l. 10s.
6d. had come in in small donations.

Oct. 1. It is now again eleven oâ€™clock, and the Lord has not as yet
been pleased to send in any thing for the necessities of this day.
Let me see now how the Lord will again help us in the love of His
heart; for He will surely help, though I know not how.--Evening. When
I went to the prayer meeting, I found that only 1s. had come in, but
at the same time I was informed that the money, which had been
divided yesterday among the matrons, was enough for today also.

Oct. 2. Nothing came in yesterday, nor this morning. In addition to
this, I was so engaged, that in the afternoon I had not even time to
make inquiry how the Lord had helped. Thus it is often that I can do
nothing but quietly go on with my engagements, casting all care upon
the Lord. When I came home this evening, the first thing that met my
eyes was the following letter from a distance of many miles:

"Beloved Brother,--Five pounds are enclosed as from the Lord, as I
believe you stand in need of it for the use of the Orphans. Yours
affectionately, F. W.

Truly, the Lord, to whom we had spoken yesterday, had spoken for us,
and told this brother that we were in need of money. After having
read this letter, my eyes met two others. In the one I was informed
by a brother, that he had sold two pairs of fire screens for 8s., and
had sent the money. These screens had been for many months in his
hands for sale, and now to-day, in this our poverty, a lady came to
the shop and bought them. The other letter was from brother B.,
master of the boys in the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House, which I give here:

"I opened the boxes and found 4s. 1 1/2d. in them. This was far from
being sufficient. About four oâ€™clock three persons came to the
Orphan-Houses, and put into the box at the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House 7s.,
into the box at the Infant-Orphan-House 6s., and into the box at the
Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House 7s. Thus I have had in all to divide 1l. 4s. 1
1/2d., which meets the necessities of the day."

Oct. 3. It was exceedingly kind of the Lord to send in so much
yesterday; for the necessities of today, being Saturday, required it
all. And now, when there was again nothing in hand, there arrived
this evening a large box, sent by a sister at Stafford, whom I never
saw, which contained 1l. 5s., and the following articles: 11 gold
rings, a silver ring washed, a locket, a gold brooch, 3 single
ear-rings, a watch hook, a silver watch-guard, 2 silver-mounted eye
glasses, 3 vinaigrettes, 2 purses, a silver buckle, 2 old silver
coins, 2 silver pencil cases, 3 pairs of bracelets, 3 necklaces, 2
waist buckles, a bracelet snap, a cloak fastening, a necklace snap, a
yard measure, a mourning brooch, 7 pincushions, a snuff box, a small
looking glass, 2 china boxes, a china inkstand, 5 china cups and
saucers, a china basket, 2 china jugs, a scent bottle, a boa ring, 20
shells, a boyâ€™s cap, a pair of snuffers and stand, a little basket, a
pair of screen handles, 3 ornamental pens, 5 artificial flowers, 5
glass plates, 5 counter plates, 3 pairs of card racks, a comb, a pair
of watch pockets, 12 table mats, 8 paintings, 4 drawings, 2 fans, a
pair of garters, 3 pairs of gloves, 3 pairs of silk stockings, 3
veils, a gauze scarf, 6 ladiesâ€™ bags, 5 silk bands, 2 floss silk
scarfs, a gauze handkerchief, 2 silk scarfs, a crape shawl, a silk
shawl, 2 muslin capes, 30 yards of worn cotton lace, 8 yards of
muslin work, 9 yards of print, a pinafore, a frock, a sampler, a pair
of socks, a pair of ear-rings, and 17 ladiesâ€™ dresses.--One thing is
particularly to be noticed respecting this donation, that the Lord
from time to time raises up fresh individuals to help us in the work,
thereby continually reminding us, that He is not limited to any
individuals in particular, neither are we, His children.

Oct. 4. Today came in 19s. 4d., by sale of some of the articles sent
from Leeds. Thus our need for tomorrow is supplied.

Oct. 5. 7l. 15s. 2d. came in again today, of which 5l. was from a
brother whom I have never seen.

Oct. 6. Today came in further by sale of articles which had been sent
from Leeds, 3l. 7s. 6d., also 14s. 3d. in small donations.

Oct. 7. 1l. 14s. 2d. came in today in small donations.

It is now five weeks, since we have daily met for prayer. Not indeed
merely to ask for means, but for grace and wisdom for ourselves in
reference to the work, for the conversion of the children under our
care, for grace for those children who stand already on the Lordâ€™s
side, for a blessing upon the circulation of the Scriptures, for a
blessing upon the work, with reference to the church at large, etc.
But whilst we thus, as the Spirit led us, prayed for various things,
nevertheless the lack of means was that which had brought us day
after day together. We asked the Lord to give us the means which are
needed for carrying on the Day Schools, for buying Bibles, as several
sorts are needed, and to enable us to assist Missionary work in
foreign countries. Never at any previous time, since first the work
commenced on March 5, 1834, have we had to continue so long a time in
prayer for these funds, without obtaining the answer. The Lord,
however, gave us grace to "continue in prayer," and keep our hearts
in the assurance that He would help. Now, though He delayed long,
before He sent us the answer, in His own time He made it manifest,
that He had not only not shut His ear against our prayer in anger,
but that He had answered them even before we called; for there was
sent today, from the East Indies, a bank order for 100l., which had
been sent off two months since, therefore several days before we even
began to pray. It was left to me to apply this money as it might be
needed. As we had so long, and so particularly prayed for these
funds, I took the whole of it for them, and not for the Orphan-Fund.
--The Lord be praised for this precious answer. It was particularly
precious, as leading the dear brethren and sisters who labour in the
Day Schools, and who comparatively are little accustomed to this way,
to see how good it is to wait upon the Lord.

Oct. 10. All our wants for the Orphans have been richly supplied
during this week; and today, on my leaving for Trowbridge in the
Lordâ€™s service, I was able to send 5l. 5s. 8d. to the sisters, the
matrons.

Oct. 11â€”14. Trowbridge. I have had a good season since I have been
here. The Lord has enabled me to rise very early, and I have thus had
more than two hours of communion with Him before breakfast, the fruit
of which I have felt all the day long. The Lord in mercy continue my
enjoyment!--For the last three weeks I had been asked, yea pressed,
to come here, to minister among the saints; but I could not clearly
see it to be the Lordâ€™s will, and therefore did not go. Now I came,
assured that it was His will, and have been very happy, and greatly
helped in my service here in every way, and I am fully assured that
my labour has not been in vain. How good it is, even for this life,
according to the Lordâ€™s bidding either to go or stay!--I have seen,
whilst here, a young woman, the daughter of a brother and sister who
were in communion with us, but who have both fallen asleep. While her
father was living she hated the truth, but still she came to Bethesda
Chapel. One day, whilst there, she was made to feel the power of the
truth: and, since the death of her parents, the Lord has granted an
answer to their many prayers on her behalf; for she is now standing
on the Lordâ€™s side. Let believing parents continue in prayer for
their children, and let them also continue affectionately and at
suitable times to bring the truth before them, and to bring them to
the preaching of the Word: and in due season it will be manifested
that their labours were not in vain.

Oct. 14. Yesterday, while at Trowbridge, I received from a sister,
from the neighbourhood of London, 1l. for the Orphans. In the
evening, a sister, a servant, gave me 1s. This morning I gave myself
again to prayer respecting the Orphan-Fund, as I had reason to
believe that there was nothing in hand in Bristol, except several
pounds had come in since I left. Soon after, a sister, a servant,
gave me 5s., and, on leaving in the afternoon, a brother gave me 5l.
When I came home this evening, I found that only 3l. 10s. 8d. had
come in since I left, just sufficient to supply the need up to this
evening, so that the help which the Lord gave at Trowbridge, in
answer to prayer, came very seasonably to supply the need of tomorrow.

Oct. 20. Tuesday. During these last three days we have again
experienced the continued care of our loving Father on behalf of the
Orphans. On Saturday evening, when again there was no money at all
remaining in my hands, a pair of silver mounted horns was anonymously
left at my house. On the Lordâ€™s day I received 6l. 1s. Yesterday the
Lord sent in still more abundantly; for in the morning came in 12l.
from the neighbourhood of Wolverhampton, and in the evening 2l. was
given to me by D. C. This morning, a few minutes after I had been
thinking that no potatoes had been sent yet for the Orphans, and that
we had no money to lay in a stock (for the 14l. which came in
yesterday was at once sent off), a brother came and informed me that
he had given orders that twenty sacks of good potatoes should be sent
to the Orphan-Houses. Thus our kind Father continually cares for us.

Oct. 26. Monday. The Lord has been again very kind to us, during
these last days. There came in since Oct. 20, in small donations,
18s. 1d.; for knitting and by sale of stockings, 16s. On Friday last,
besides, there were sold stockings to the amount of 17s. 5d. In the
evening a brother gave me 5l. This 5l. and the money for the
stockings came in very seasonably, as it enabled us to supply the
large demands of the next day. Yesterday morning, when I took my hat
from the rail, I found in one of my gloves a note, containing a 5l.
note and the following words: "2l. for the Orphans, the rest for dear
brother and sister Muller," There came in still further yesterday 2l.
12s. 6d. Thus we are again supplied for about three days.

In reference to the note which was put into my hat, containing 5l., I
just add, that I had repeatedly asked the Lord for means for our own
personal expenses, previous to the reception of it, as we had but
very little money for ourselves. Indeed the very moment, before I
took my hat from the rail, I had risen from my knees, having again
asked the Lord for means for ourselves and for the Orphans.

Oct. 30. The evening before last 9s. came in, being the produce of
some work which a sister had done for the benefit of the Orphans; and
early this morning, while my candle was yet burning, a paper was
brought, containing 12s. These two donations, with what little is in
hand besides, supply our need for this day.

Oct. 31. Saturday. There was no money in hand, My mind was
particularly stirred up to open the box in my house. I did so, and
found 1l. 10s. 7d. in it. The boxes in the Orphan-Houses were
likewise opened, in which was found 8s. Also a brother from Tetbury
gave 2s. 6d. Thus the need of today was supplied.

Nov. 2. Monday. 1l. 11s, is the need of today, and as 1l. 12s. has
come in since Saturday evening, we are helped for today.

November 3 and 4. Only 2s. 6d. has come in since Nov. 2nd, but the
necessities of these two days were supplied by means of articles
which had been given to be disposed of.

Nov. 5. Only 2s. came in yesterday for knitting. We are now, without
any thing, cast upon the Lord. The need of today is 1l. 3s., which I
am unable to send.--Afternoon. There came in at three oâ€™clock 4l. for
some of the articles which had been sent from Stafford, and which had
been sold some time since, so that I was able to send the needful
supplies. There came in 6d. besides.

Nov. 7. Saturday. Of the 4l. 2s. 6d. which was in hand the day before
yesterday, there was so much left, that, with an addition of 9s. 6d.,
all the necessities of today could be supplied. This one of the
labourers gave.

Nov. 8. Lordâ€™s day. Today the Lord has been again very kind, and
looked upon us in our poverty. Besides the 1l. 10s. for rent, I
received with Ecclesiastes ix. 10, 5l. I was also informed that two
large sacks of oatmeal had been sent from Glasgow as a present. In
addition to all this, a brother told me that he had it in his heart
to give 10l. worth of materials, for winter clothes for the children,
leaving the material to my choice, according to the need, so that
just what was most desirable might be given. (He, accordingly, sent a
few days after, a large pair of good blankets, 32 1/2 yards of mixed
beaver, and 10 1/2 yards of blue beaver for cloaks.) There was also
1s. put into the box at Bethesda, with the words, "Jehovah Jireh."
These words have often been refreshing to my soul for many years
past, and I wrote them with a valuable diamond ring, set with ten
brilliants, which was given to the Orphans about twenty months since,
upon a pane of glass in my room, which circumstance, in remembrance
of the remarkable way in which that valuable ring came, has often
cheered my heart, when in deep poverty my eyes have been cast upon
"JEHOVAH JIREH"(i.e. the Lord will provide) whilst sitting in my room.

I purposed to have gone to Trowbridge yesterday, and had settled it
so on Friday evening with brother ----. But no sooner had I decided to
do so, than I felt no peace in the prospect of going. After having
prayed about it on Friday evening, and yesterday morning, I
determined not to go, and I felt sure the Lord had some reason for
not allowing me to feel happy in the prospect of going. I began now
to look out for blessings for this day, considering that the Lord had
kept me here for good to some souls. This evening I was especially
led to press the truth on the consciences of the unconverted,
entreating and beseeching them, and telling them also that I felt
sure, the Lord had, in mercy to some of them, kept me from going to
Trowbridge. I spoke on Genesis vi. 1â€”5. Immediately after I saw fruit
of the Word. An individual fully opened his heart to me. I walked
about with him till about ten oâ€™clock, even as long as I had any
strength left. [About ten days afterwards a brother told me of a poor
drunkard who heard me that evening, and who since then had stayed up
till about twelve oâ€™clock every night to read the Scriptures, and who
had not been intoxicated since.]

Nov. 11. As only 4s. 6d. had come in for knitting, and 2s. 6d. as a
donation for the Orphans since the 8th, we were now again very poor.
Today there was 9s. more needed than there was in hand, which one of
the labourers gave. There were sent today anonymously, nine sacks of
potatoes, a proof that our Father continues to be mindful of us,
though we are now again so poor.

Nov. 12. Only 6s. 6d. came in last night, 4s. 6d. of which is the
produce of the work of a sister, and 2s. from a poor afflicted
sister. This 6s. 6d. was very precious in my esteem, because it
showed me afresh our Fatherâ€™s heart towards us, and it was a little
to begin the day with. No more has come in this morning, when at
twelve I heard from the Orphan-Houses that 1s. 6d. had been received
for knitting, and that about eleven this morning a sovereign was
left, anonymously, at the Girlsâ€™-Orphan House. The paper in which the
sovereign was enclosed contained only the letters "A. U. S."--This was
a precious deliverance. We have thus enough for today.--Evening.
There came in still further today for knitting 3s., and a little girl
sent 1s. When I came home this evening, I found that a boyâ€™s jacket
and a sovereign had been left anonymously at my house. Truly, these
deliverances today have been very precious! We have now enough for
tomorrow also.

Nov. 14. Trowbridge. Saturday. That which came in the evening before
last supplied our need yesterday; but since then nothing has been
received, and therefore there were no means to meet this dayâ€™s
demands. I had to go this morning in the Lordâ€™s service to
Trowbridge, feeling assured that His time had now come for my going,
and it required indeed looking at the power, wisdom, and love of our
Father, comfortably to leave my dear fellow-labourers, there being
nothing in hand. My comfort was that the same kind Father who had
provided would provide.

Nov. 16. Trowbridge. Monday. This morning I received a letter from
Bristol, in which I was informed that on Saturday came in 12s. 6d;
also 9s. was given by one of the labourers. Besides this were
received 3s. by sale of articles, and three small donations,
amounting to 5s. Thus the Lord most mercifully sent in 1l. 9s. 6d.,
which was enough to supply the absolute need.

Nov. 17. Trowbridge. This morning I had again the report from Bristol
about yesterday, in order that, though unable to send means, I might
help with my prayers. In a note written in the morning by brother B.,
and sent to my wife, he writes thus: "I know not whether the Lord has
sent in any money for the Orphans or not. I have received none.
Sister ---- (one of the labourers) has given half a ton of coals to
the Boysâ€™-Orphan-House.

There are coals needed at the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House, and much money for
the ordinary expenses. There is sufficient in all the houses for
dinner. He has said, â€˜I will never leave thee nor forsake thee,â€™ so
that we may boldly say, the Lord is MY helper." In the afternoon of
the same day he writes: "I have delayed writing as long as I could.
The Lord has not sent any thing, but the sisters can do without
taking in bread, and they had money enough to pay for the milk,
except sister ----, who has, however, received a few shillings for some
articles of her own, that she sold. Thus we are supplied with the
absolute necessities for today." In reference to the last lines I
make a few remarks. At first sight it might appear as if it were a
failure of the principles on which we act, that now and then
individuals who are connected with the work have been obliged to sell
articles of their own to procure things which were needed. But let it
be remembered, that under no circumstances prayer for temporal
supplies can be expected to prevail with the Lord, except we are
willing to part with money or any needless articles which we may have
of our own. Indeed an Institution like the one under my care should
not be carried on by any rich believer, on the principles on which
we, by grace, are enabled to act, except it be that he were made
willing himself to give of his own property, as long as he has any
thing, whenever the Institution is in real need.

Nov. 18. Bristol. This morning at twelve I returned from Trowbridge,
where I had been very happy, and where the Lord evidently used me
this time. How happy a thing it is to go and to stay with the Lord!--I
found that yesterday some money had been put into the orphan-box at
my house, which my wife had reason to believe was at least 1l. She
therefore sent 1l. which had come in for the rent of the
Orphan-Houses, in consideration of this, as she had not the key to
the box. This 1l. met the necessities of yesterday, and with 1s.
additional, which one of the labourers gave, was also enough for the
dinner of today. There came in also yesterday from Clapham, as a
token that the Lord allows us only to be poor for the trial of our
faith, but not in anger, the following articles of clothing: 6
frocks, 7 pinafores, 4 chemises, 3 pocket handkerchiefs, 2
petticoats, 3 night caps, 4 work bags (all new) a yard of merino, and
12 silk papers. On my arrival at home I opened the box in my house,
in which I found 2l. 0s. 6d., so that I had 1l. 0s. 6d. to send off,
whereby the usual quantity of bread could be taken in.

Nov. 19. Since Sept. 18, 1838, this has been, perhaps, of all the
days the most trying. The poverty has been exceedingly great for the
last six days. There had come in no money since yesterday. On this
account no bread could be taken in, as far as the natural prospect
went. Nor was there any money at three in the afternoon to take in
milk for tea, when brother B. came to me. However, we prayed
together, and the Lord had mercy. For one of the labourers found that
he was able, which he knew not before, to give of his own 10s., so
that there were the means to take in the milk, by the time that it is
usually brought. This evening about six there came in still further
10s. 3d. by the sale of Reports. Thus, by the good hand of our God
upon us, we were able to take in bread as usual. How very kind of the
Lord that He sent us an abundance of potatoes and two large sacks of
oatmeal, before this season of deep poverty, as to pecuniary means,
commenced! May the Lord now in great pity look upon us, for we are in
deeper poverty than ever, as with every day it increases, whilst
there is no full deliverance. Thanks be to the Lord that my mind has
been in peace this day also, though our faith has been so very much
tried! Thanks to Him that my mind is in peace now, though there is
nothing but want on every side before me, respecting tomorrow!
Surely, the Lord will again, in His own time, more fully stretch
forth His helping hand!

Nov. 20. Nothing more had come in this morning. It was nearly three
oâ€™clock this afternoon, when brother B. called on me, to see whether
any thing had come in; but I had received nothing. I was obliged to
go out with a brother from Devonshire, and therefore requested him to
wait till I returned. About a quarter past three I came back, when,
among several persons who were waiting at my house to converse with
me, there was a sister whom I much desired to see about some church
affair. I did so. When I had ended the conversation with her, about
half-past three, she gave me 10l. for the Orphans. More sweet, and
more needed, were none of the previous deliverances. Language cannot
express the real joy in God which I had. I was free from, excitement.
The circumstance did not un-fit me even for a single moment to attend
to my other engagements. I was not in the least surprised, because,
by grace, my soul had been waiting on God for deliverance. Never had
help been so long delayed. In none of the houses was milk for tea,
and in one even no bread, and there was no money to purchase either.
It was only a few minutes before the milkman came, when brother B.
arrived at the Orphan-Houses with the money. Yet even now it was more
than an hour before the usual tea time. The Lord be praised for this
deliverance! Such a week of deep poverty, as we have had since Nov.
13, we never had before. Yet, thanks to the Lord! we have lacked
nothing, and we have been kept from dishonouring Him by unbelief. I
further notice respecting this day, that before this 10l. was
received there was sent to the Infant-Orphan-House a cart load of
clumps of wood, when there were neither coals, nor money to buy any.

Nov. 21. Saturday evening. The 10l. which came in yesterday afternoon
is all expended. Again I have not a penny in hand. We are, however,
brought to the close of another week, and have now, a little at
least, replenished our provision stock; and should the Lord permit us
to enter upon another week, He will surely provide according to our
need.

Nov. 22. Lordâ€™s day. The Lord has been again mindful of our need, and
has sent us in the means to meet the demands of two days. Besides the
1l. 10s. which came in for rent, a brother gave me this morning two
sovereigns, a sister from a distance sent it., and a brother, who
spent this day with us, put 12s. 6d. into the box at my house, which
our need soon brought out.

Nov. 23. This evening were given, after all the money had been again
disbursed, 2 gold rings, 5 small silver coins, a silver ring, 5
silver studs, a silver buckle, a pair of ear-rings, a necklace, and a
little box.

Nov. 25. As only 3s. 6d. had come in for knitting since the 22nd, we
were now again very poor. The boxes in the Orphan-Houses were opened,
but only 1s. was found in them. In this our poverty 6l. came in this
afternoon for some of the articles which had been sent from Stafford
on Oct. 3rd, and which had been sold some time since. This money had
been expected for some time, but came in only now, in this our great
need. In the evening came in still further 2l. from the East Indies.

Nov. 26. Today were sent from Newport, near Barnstaple, 2 rings, a
brooch and 4s.

Nov. 27. This morning I received 4l. from a sister in Dublin, before
we were really in need; but this donation came very seasonably to
meet the large demands of tomorrow, Saturday, for which there is
nothing in hand. There was also taken out of the boxes in the
Orphan-Houses, this afternoon, 2l. 12s. 6d.

Nov. 28. Saturday. There has come in again 1l. today. Thus the Lord
has bountifully supplied our need during this week, always sending
the means without allowing us to be so deeply tried as during the two
previous weeks.

Nov. 29. The Lordâ€™s loving hand has again today provided richly for
the Orphans, for at least two days. There came in altogether 6l. 19s.
6d.

Dec. 1. Today we were so poor as to the Orphan-Fund, that we should
not have been able to meet the demands of the day; but the Lordâ€™s
loving heart remembered us. There came in this morning 5l. 7s. for
some of the articles which were sent some time since from Stafford. I
have purposely again and again mentioned how the help, which the love
of some saints at Leeds and Stafford sent, delivered us, that it
might be manifest that those donors were directed by the Lord in this
matter.

Dec. 2. When today there was again but little money in hand, because
of the disbursements of yesterday, D. C. brought me 2l., which his
wife a sister had saved out of housekeeping, for the benefit of the
Orphans. About an hour, after I had received this 2l., there was
sent, in two post-office-orders, 6l. 4s. 6d. by a sister, being the
produce of the sale of some trinkets; of which sum one half is to be
used for the benefit of the Orphans, and the other half for my own
personal necessities. Thus the Lord has by this donation also
provided for myself and family, when we were in much need.

Dec. 5. Saturday morning. Yesterday afternoon a sister left two
sovereigns at my house for the Orphans. The Lord in the love of His
heart, remembered our Saturdayâ€™s necessities, and sent in this
supply; for there was only 18s. 6d. in hand when this money came, and
2l. 12s. is needed for this day. Evening. As there was now again only
6s. 6d. in hand, I gave myself to prayer, and immediately after I had
risen from my knees, 1l. 5s. 6d. was given to me, for things which
had been sold, being chiefly articles which had been sent from
Stafford. There was also a flute left anonymously at my house, this
evening.

Dec. 6. Today there came in still further 2l. 2s. 6d.

Dec. 7. Again 1l. 11s. has come in.

Dec. 9. Morning. This is the last day of the fifth year of the Orphan
work. Hitherto the Lord has helped us! This morning there was only
1l. 1s. 9d. in hand, but 1l. 7s. was needed for the supply of today.
I therefore opened the box in my house, in which 2s. 6d. was found.
This 1l. 4s. 3d. I sent off to the Orphan-Houses. Evening. There came
in during this day 1l. 6s. 6d.; out of this I had to pay away 1l.
2s., so that now, at the close of the year, though the balance
amounts to 15l. 0s. 6 1/4d., there is only 4s. 6 1/4d. in hand, as
the rest has been put by for the rent, which is due up to this time.
With this 4s. 6 1/4d. we have now to commence the sixth year, leaning
upon the living God, who most assuredly during this year also will
help us in every way, as our circumstances may call for it.



At the close of these details (with reference to the year from Dec.
9, 1839, to Dec. 9, 1840) I make a few remarks in connexion with them.

1. Though our trials of faith during this year also have been many,
and recurring more frequently than during any previous year, and
though we have been often reduced to the greatest extremity, yet the
Orphans have lacked nothing; for they have always had good nourishing
food, and the necessary articles of clothing, etc.

2. Should it be supposed by any one in reading the plain details of
our trials of faith during this year, that on account of them we have
been disappointed in our expectations, or are discouraged in the
work, my answer is, that the very reverse is the fact. Such days were
expected from the commencement of the work; nay, more than this, the
chief end for which the Institution was established is, that the
Church of Christ at large might be benefited by seeing manifestly the
hand of God stretched out on our behalf in the hour of need, in
answer to prayer. Our desire, therefore, is not that we may be
without trials of faith, but that the Lord graciously would be
pleased to support us in the trial, that we may not dishonour Him by
distrust.

3. This way of living brings the Lord remarkably near, He is, as it
were, morning by morning inspecting our stores, that accordingly He
may send help. Greater and more manifest nearness of the Lordâ€™s
presence I have never had, than when after breakfast there were no
means for dinner, and then the Lord provided the dinner for more than
one hundred persons; or when, after dinner, there were no means for
the tea, and yet the Lord provided the tea; and all this without one
single human being having been informed about our need. This moreover
I add, that although we, who have been eye witnesses of these
gracious interpositions of our Father, have not been so benefited by
them as we might and ought to have been, yet we have in some measure
derived blessing from them. One thing is certain, that we are not
tired of doing the Lordâ€™s work in this way.

4. It has been more that once observed, that such a way of living
must lead the mind continually to think whence food, clothes, etc.,
are to come, and so unfit for spiritual exercises. Now, in the first
place, I answer, that our minds are very little tried about the
necessaries of life, just because the care respecting them is laid
upon our Father, who, because we are His children, not only allows us
to do so, but will have us to do so. Secondly, it must be remembered,
that, even if our minds were much tried about the supplies for the
children, and the means for the other work, yet, because we look to
the Lord alone for these things, we should only be brought, by our
sense of need, into the presence of our Father, for the supply of it;
and that is a blessing, and no injury to the soul. Thirdly, our souls
realize that for the glory of God and for the benefit of the church
at large, it is that we have these trials of faith, and that leads
again to God, to ask Him for fresh supplies of grace, to be enabled
to be faithful in this service.

5. My heartâ€™s desire and prayer to God is, that all believers, who
read this, may by these many answers to prayer be encouraged to pray,
particularly as it regards the conversion of their friends and
relations, their own state of heart, the state of the Church at
large, and the success of the preaching of the gospel. Do not think,
dear reader, that these things are peculiar to us, and cannot be
enjoyed by all the saints. Although every child of God is not called
by the Lord to establish Schools and Orphan-Houses, and to trust in
the Lord for means for them; yet there is nothing on the part of the
Lord to hinder, why you may not know by experience, far more
abundantly than we do now, His willingness to answer the prayers of
His children. Do but prove the faithfulness of God. Do but carry your
every want to Him. Only maintain an upright heart. But if you live in
sin; if you wilfully and habitually do things, respecting which you
know that they are contrary to the will of God, then you cannot
expect to be heard by Him. "If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me: but verily God hath heard me; He hath attended
to the voice of my prayer." Psalm lxvi. 18, 19.

6. As it regards the children of God, who by the labour of their
hands, or in any business or profession, earn their bread,
particularly the poorer classes of them, I give my affectionate yet
solemn advice, to carry into practice the principles on which this
Institution is conducted, as it regards not going in debt. Are you in
debt? then make confession of sin respecting it. Sincerely confess to
the Lord that you have sinned against Rom. xiii. 8. And if you are
resolved no more to contract debt, whatever may be the result, and
you are waiting on the Lord, and truly trust in Him, your present
debts will soon be paid. Are you out of debt? then whatever your
future want may be, be resolved, in the strength of Jesus, rather to
suffer the greatest privation, whilst waiting upon God for help, than
to use unscriptural means, such as borrowing, taking goods on credit,
etc., to deliver yourselves. This way needs but to be tried, in order
that its excellency may be enjoyed.



On Dec. 14, 15, 16, and 25, we had public meetings, at which the
account of the Lordâ€™s dealings with us during the last year, in
respect of the Orphan-Houses, Schools, etc., was given, for the
benefit of any who desired to come. The preceding part of the
Narrative gives the substance of what was stated at those meetings,
in reference to the many answers to prayer which the Lord has granted
to us during the past year. There are a few points more, which may be
of interest to the believing reader, and which were then mentioned,
which I shall now add.

1. There have been, during this year also, six Day Schools for poor
children, entirely supported by the funds of the Institution, all of
which have been established by us.

Besides this, the rent for the school room of a seventh School,
carried on by a sister, who is known to us, has been paid and two
other such Schools, out of Bristol, have been assisted with Bibles
and Testaments.

The number of all the children that have had schooling in the Day
Schools through the medium of the Institution, since its formation,
amounts to 2216; the number of those at present in the six Day
Schools is 303.

These Day Schools have defrayed, by the payments of the children,
about the sixth part of their own expenses.

2. There is one Sunday School entirely supported by the funds of the
Institution.

3. There has been since the formation of the Institution one Adult
School connected with it, in which, on the Lordâ€™s day afternoons,
since that time, about 150 adults have been instructed.

This School has been discontinued at the close of this year, and
instead of it it is purposed to have a regular Evening School for
adults who cannot read. It is purposed to instruct them for about an
hour and a half in reading and writing twice a week, and afterwards
to read the Scriptures for a short time to them, and to bring the
truth before them. The School will commence at seven oâ€™clock in the
evening, and the instruction will be altogether free.

4. The number of Bibles and Testaments which have been circulated
through the medium of the Institution, during the last year, amounts
to 452 copies.

There have been circulated, since March 5, 1834, six thousand and
forty-four copies of the Scriptures.

5. There have been laid out during the last year, of the funds of the
Institution, 120l. 10s. 2d. for Missionary purposes.

6. There are at present 91 Orphans in the three houses. The total
number of the Orphans who have been under our care from April 11,
1836, to Dec. 9, 1840, amounts to 129.

I notice further the following points in connexion with the
Orphan-Houses.

1. Without any one having been asked for any thing by us, the sum of
3,937l. 1s. 1d. has been given to us, as the result of prayer to God,
since the commencement of the work. 2. Besides this also, a great
variety of provisions, clothes, furniture, etc. 3. Though there has
been during this year as much, or more sickness, in the
Orphan-Houses, than during any previous year; yet I own to the praise
of the Lord publicly, that it has been very little, considering the
number of the children.

For the future we purpose, according to the time, means, etc., which
the Lord may be pleased to give us, to attend to a fifth object, the
circulation of such publications, as may be beneficial, with the
blessing of God, to benefit both believers and unbelievers. We
purpose either to buy or print tracts for unbelievers, and to sell
them, or have them distributed, as opportunity maybe given; and to
buy or print such publications, for circulation, as may be
instrumental in directing the minds of believers to those truths
which in these last days are more especially needed, or have been
particularly lost sight of, and which may lead believers to return to
the written word of God.



THE BLESSING OF THE LORD UPON THE WORK IN REFERENCE TO THE SOULS OF
THE CHILDREN.



1. During the last fourteen months there have been meetings purposely
for children, at which the Scriptures have been expounded to them. At
these meetings an almost universal attention is manifested by them,
which I thankfully ascribe to the Lord, and upon which I look as a
forerunner of greater blessing.

2. During the last year three of the Sunday School children have been
received into fellowship.

3. At the end of last year there had been eight Orphans received into
communion: during the present year fourteen have been received: in
all twenty-two.

4. Of those two who died during this year, one was an infant, and the
other a girl about twelve years old. The latter, on the whole, a well
behaved child, was for months ill in consumption before she died. The
nearer she came to the end of her life, the greater was the
solicitude of those under whose care she was, respecting the state of
her heart, as she was evidently unprepared for eternity. But now we
saw, what never had been witnessed in any other of the children to
such a degree. This, on the whole, naturally amiable, meek, and quiet
child, manifested not merely complete indifference to the truth, the
nearer she came to the close of her life; but also showed much
aversion, and, as far as she could, great enmity to the truth. At
last she was evidently dying, yet altogether unprepared for death. In
this state all the Orphans in the Girlsâ€™-Orphan-House were assembled
together, and the awful state ofâ€™ this dying child was pointed out to
the unbelieving Orphans as a warning, and to the believing Orphans as
a subject for gratitude to God on behalf of themselves, that they, by
grace, were in a different state; and it was laid on their hearts to
give themselves to prayer for their dying companion. The labourers in
the work were sustained to hope still, and to pray still, though
Charlotte Lee remained opposed to the truth while in this dying
state. However, unexpectedly she lived ten days longer, and about two
days before her death she was so altogether different, that we have
hope in her end.

It was stated in the last yearâ€™s Report, that we were looking for
fruit upon our labours as it regards the conversion of the children,
as the Lord had given to us a measure of earnestness in praying for
them. The Lord has dealt with us according to our expectations. But I
expect far more than what we have seen. While the chief object of our
work has been, and is still, the manifestation of the heart of God
towards His children, and the reality of power with God in prayer;
yet, as we hoped, and as it has been our prayer, the Lord gives to us
also the joy of seeing one child after another brought to stand
openly on the Lordâ€™s side.--As far as my experience goes, it appears
to me that believers generally have expected far too little of
present fruit upon their labours among children. There has been a
hoping that the Lord some day or other would own the instruction
which they give to children, and would answer at some time or other,
though after many years only, the prayers which they offer up on
their behalf. Now, while such passages as Proverbs xxii. 6,
Ecclesiastes xi. 1, Galatians vi. 9, 1 Cor. xv. 58, give unto us
assurance not merely respecting every thing which we do for the Lord,
in general, but also respecting bringing up children in the fear of
the Lord, in particular, that our labour is not in vain in the Lord;
yet we have to guard against abusing such passages, by thinking it a
matter of little moment whether we see present fruit or not; but, on
the contrary, we should give the Lord no rest till we see present
fruit, and therefore in persevering, yet submissive, prayer, we
should make known our requests unto God. I add, as an encouragement
to believers who labour among children, that during the last two
years, seventeen other young persons or children, from the age of
eleven and a half to seventeen, have been received into fellowship
among us, and that I am looking out now for many more to be
converted, and that not merely of the Orphans, but of the Sunday and
Day School children. As in so many respects we live in remarkable
times, so in this respect also, that the Lord is working greatly
among the children in many places.

I most earnestly solicit all who know the reality of our privilege as
the children of God, even that we have power with God, to help us
with their prayers, that many more of the children may soon be
converted, and that those who have made a profession of faith in the
Lord Jesus may be enabled so to walk, as that the name of Jesus may
be magnified by them. The believing reader must know how great the
aim of Satan will be to lead those children, who, from nine years
old, and upward, have been received into fellowship, back again into
the world, and thereby seek to lead believers to give up looking for
real conversion among children.

The total of the expenses connected with the objects of-the
Institution, exclusive of the Orphan-Houses, from Nov. 19, 1839, to
Nov. 19, 1840, is 622l. 2s. 6 1/2d. The balance in hand on Nov. 19,
1840, was 13l. 2s. 9 3/4d.

The total of the expenses connected with the three Orphan-Houses,
from Dec. 9, 1839, to Dec. 9, 1840, is 900l. 11s. 2 1/2d. The balance
in hand on Dec. 9, 1840, was 15l. 0s. 6 1/4d.



Dec. 23. There was sent to us for ourselves, anonymously, a piece of
beef, which came very seasonably, as we are just now again very poor.

Dec. 26. This morning a poor brother, who, like ourselves, lives in
dependence upon the Lord for his temporal supplies, whilst serving
the Lord in the ministry of the Word, and who has been several days
staying with us, gave to my wife 3s. 6d., for our own personal
necessities, saying, that we might need it. This is indeed a most
remarkable donation, both because of the individual from whom it
came, and because of its having been given just now; for without it
we should not have been able to provide for our temporal necessities
this day.



REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1840.



I. As to the church.

68 brethren and sisters brother Craik and I found in communion, when
we came to Bristol.

687 have been admitted into communion since we came to Bristol.

755 would be, therefore, the total number of those in fellowship with
us, had there been no changes. But

79 have left Bristol.

55 have left us, but are still in Bristol.

44 are under church discipline.

52 have fallen asleep.

230 are therefore to be deducted from 755, so that there are only 525
at present in communion.

114 have been added during the past year, of whom 47 have been
brought to the knowledge of the Lord among us, 24 besides, though
they knew the Lord, had never been in fellowship any where; 43 had
been at some time or other in fellowship, but most of them with
saints not residing in Bristol.



II. As to the supply of my temporal necessities:

1. The Lord has been pleased to send me by the Freewill Offerings of
the saints among whom I labour, through the instrumentality of the
boxes Â£128 5s. 10 1/2d.

2. Through saints in and out of Bristol, by presents in money Â£100
5s. 1d.

3. Through family connection Â£8 18s. 0d.

4. In provisions, clothes, etc. worth to us at least Â£5 0s. 0d.

Altogether Â£242 8s. 11 1/2d.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Narrative of some of the Lord's
Dealings with George MÃ¼ller, by George MÃ¼ller

